--- Page 1 ---
The Boulder Valley 
The Boulder Valley 
Comprehensive Plan
Comprehensive Plan
Major Update - June 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
 3
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Land Acknowledgment
•	
By the summer of 1859, thousands of gold seekers 
were in the Boulder area, and many squatted on 
Indigenous lands, continuing the dramatic expansion 
of Euro-American occupation of Indigenous lands 
that soon exiled Indigenous peoples from the 
Boulder area. 
•	
In August 1864, more than 100 Boulder County 
residents mobilized into Company D of the Third 
Colorado Cavalry at Fort Chambers along Boulder 
Creek east of what is now known as Boulder. 
•	
Company D – which included 46 Boulder men and 
prominent Boulder County residents – later 
participated in the barbaric massacre of peaceful 
Tsétsėhéstȧhese (“Cheyenne”) and 
Hinono’eino’ (“Arapaho”) Peoples at Sand Creek 
on Nov. 29, 1864. Among those killed in the 
massacre were women, children, elders and chiefs, 
including Nowoo3 and Chief White Antelope. 
Despite having participated in horrific atrocities, 
members of Company D received a heroes’ welcome 
upon their return home. 
•	
The city has benefited and continues to benefit 
directly from the colonization of Indigenous lands 
and from removal policies that violated human 
rights, broke government treaties and forced 
Indigenous Peoples from their homelands. 
We must not only acknowledge our past but work to 
build a more just future. We are committed to taking 
action beyond these words. We pledge to use this land 
acknowledgment to help inspire education and 
reflection and initiate meaningful action to help support 
Indigenous Nations, communities and organizations. 
We intend to use this acknowledgment when the City of 
Boulder develops work plans that guide day-to-day 
work, begins new projects, starts long-term community 
plans, and recruits and hires staff. 
Let this formal acknowledgment — which honors and 
builds on the city’s Indigenous Peoples Day Resolution 
(1190)—stand as a critical step in our work to unify 
Boulder communities, combat prejudice and eliminate 
discrimination against Indigenous Peoples. 
The City of Boulder acknowledges the city is on the 
ancestral homelands and unceded territory of 
Indigenous Peoples who have traversed, lived in and 
stewarded lands in the Boulder Valley since time 
immemorial. Those Indigenous Nations include the: Di 
De’i (Apache), Hinono’eiteen (Arapaho), 
Tsétsėhéstȧhese (Cheyenne), Nʉmʉnʉʉ 
(Comanche), Caiugu (Kiowa), Čariks i Čariks 
(Pawnee), Sosonih (Shoshone), Oc’eti 
S’akowin (Sioux) and Núuchiu (Ute). 
•	
We honor and respect the people of these Nations 
and their ancestors. We also recognize that 
Indigenous knowledge, oral histories, and languages 
handed down through generations have shaped 
profound cultural and spiritual connections with 
Boulder-area lands and ecosystems – connections 
that are sustained and celebrated to this day. 
•	
The City of Boulder recognizes that those now living 
and working on these ancestral lands have a 
responsibility to acknowledge and address the past. 
The city refutes past justifications for the 
colonization of Indigenous lands and acknowledges 
a legacy of oppression that has caused 
intergenerational trauma to Indigenous Peoples and 
families that includes: 
•	
For more than 10,000 years, generations of 
Indigenous Peoples have lived and thrived on 
ancestral homelands that Euro-Americans colonized 
as Boulder. 
•	
Indigenous Peoples in Boulder have, as in all parts of 
the Americas, endured centuries of cruelty, 
exploitation and genocide. 
•	
The westward expansion of Euro-American 
population and culture in the 19th century caused 
extensive hunger and diseases that devastated 
Indigenous Peoples’ way of life. 
•	
In October 1858, Hinono’ei neecee (“Arapaho Chief”) 
Nowoo3 (“Niwot,” “Lefthand”) and other Hinono’eino’ 
(“Arapaho”) Peoples told a party of gold-seekers 
camped in what is now known as Boulder that they 
could not remain on Indigenous land as defined by 
the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie. 
•	
After gold was found west of Boulder in January 
1859, many of those same gold-seekers helped 
found the Boulder Town Company on Feb. 10, 1859, 
in violation of the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie. 
Cover Image: Community member photograph submitted as part  
of Photo Voice with Chris Carruth, Experiments in Public Art:  
The Comprehensive Plan Update.
This Page: Boulder was the first city in the United States to pass a 
dedicated sales tax to buy, manage and maintain open space.


--- Page 3 ---
4
 5
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Acknowledgments
City Council
•	
Taishya Adams, Member 
•	
Matt Benjamin, Member 
•	
Aaron Brockett, Mayor 
•	
Lauren Folkerts, Member (through November 2025) 
•	
Rob Kaplan, Member 
•	
Tina Marquis, Member 
•	
Ryan Schuchard, Member 
•	
Nicole Speer, Member 
•	
Mark Wallach, Member 
•	
Tara Winer, Mayor Pro Tem 
City Planning Board
•	
Jorge Boone, Member (through March 2026) 
•	
Claudia Hanson Thiem, Member 
•	
Laura Kaplan, Vice Chair 
•	
Maxwell Lord, Member 
•	
Mark McIntyre, Chair 
•	
Kurt Nordback, Member 
•	
Mason Roberts, Member 
•	
ml Robles, Member 
Board of County 
Commissioners
•	
Claire Levy, Commissioner 
•	
Marta Loachamin, Comisionada/ Commissioner 
•	
Ashley Stolzmann, Commissioner 
County Planning 
Commission
•	
Mark Bloomfield, Second Vice Chair 
•	
George Gerstle, Member 
•	
Byron Kominek, Member 
•	
Rachel Lee, Member 
•	
Sam Libby, Vice Chair 
•	
Rita Manna, Member 
•	
Gavin McMillan, Member 
•	
Bobby Umstead, Member 
•	
Chris Whitney, Chair 
•	
Ann Goldfarb (through February 2025) 
Contents
CHAPTER 1    Welcome to the Plan. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7
CHAPTER 2    Vision and Values. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  25
CHAPTER 3    Policies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 51
CHAPTER 4    Future Land Use. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  77
CHAPTER 5    Implementation. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  123
CHAPTER 6    Glossary of Terms. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  129
Approved by:
•	
City Council on XX, 2026
•	
City Planning Board on XX, 2026
•	
County Planning Commission on XX, 2026
•	
Board of County Commissioners on XX, 2026
The Intergovenmental Agreement between the City of Boulder and Boulder County was approved on March 2, 2021 
and is effective through December 31, 2042. 
Community members discussing areas they are interested in exploring with city staff as part of the Boulder Valley Comprehensive  
Plan update. 


--- Page 4 ---
 7
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Welcome to the Plan
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan is the community’s guide for how the Boulder 
Valley grows, connects and evolves over the next 20 years. The City of Boulder and Boulder 
County adopt the plan jointly because accomplishing the community’s vision for the future 
requires us to work together.
This plan is driven by our community. It connects shared values to choices about where 
homes and jobs are located, how people move around, how we collectively care for the 
environment and support a sustainable, equitable and resilient community. The core 
components of the plan are:
•	
Policies that inform city and county decisions
•	
Planning Areas Map that describes the extent of the plan’s applicability, where urban 
development is appropriate and where rural character will be preserved
•	
Future Land Use Map that identifies the desired land use pattern across the  
Boulder Valley  
1
Artwork by Cal Brackin.


--- Page 5 ---
 9
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
8
Why the Plan Matters
The Boulder Valley Planning Area
Boulder Valley Planning Area
Boulder County
City of Boulder
Other Towns and Cities
A Shared Direction
The comprehensive plan acts as a compass. It 
is not a set of step-by-step directions or a 
forecast of exactly what will happen, but a 
guide that establishes expectations and keeps 
policymakers and the community pointed in a 
shared direction to achieve desired outcomes. 
It provides the basis for long-term decisions, 
expenditures and commitments that extend 
beyond an election cycle. This plan is the 
primary guiding document for the City of 
Boulder. Boulder County collaborates on the 
creation and implementation of the plan for 
unincorporated areas that are within the 
Planning Area boundary. The county also 
maintains the Boulder County Comprehensive 
Plan, which applies to all unincorporated land 
in the county. 
A Record of Policy
The policies included in the comprehensive 
plan are reflective of broad community 
sentiment and establish a baseline of 
expectations for the next 20 years. They are 
broad in scope to be responsive to changing 
community needs and resilient in times  
of disruption.
A Framework for Decisions
The comprehensive plan will inform future 
planning efforts, zoning and code updates,  
and development applications that require 
general consistency with the plan. The plan 
provides a framework for careful analysis and 
consideration of tradeoffs when community 
members, city and county staff, and 
policymakers consider future decisions.
A Way to Measure Progress
The plan is intended to be put into action. It is 
the link between long-term community values 
and near-term choices about the future. The 
plan is a common reference point directing the 
way forward to implement the community’s 
vision in a coordinated and connected way.
Plan Adoption and  
State Compliance
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan is 
jointly adopted by the City of Boulder and 
Boulder County. As part of the adoption 
process, public hearings are required and 
conducted by the approval bodies including 
the City of Boulder Planning Board and City 
Council, and Boulder County Planning 
Commission and Board of County 
Commissioners. Details on which bodies review 
and approve different types of changes as well 
as the timing of different types of updates to 
the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan are 
outlined in the amendment procedures 
included in the intergovernmental agreement 
between the city and county. 
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan 
conforms with state regulations for municipal 
“master plans” as outlined in CRS 31-23-206 
and related statutes. Some required elements 
are provided through more detailed 
departmental plans and documents that are 
considered sub-elements of this plan such as 
subcommunity and area plans, transportation 
plans, housing plans and water supply plans. 
The Planning Areas and Future Land Use Maps 
and related policies describing lands that are 
eligible for annexation within three miles of 
the city boundary serve to fulfill the 
requirements outlined in CRS 31-12-105(e). 
NORTH
NORTH
The comprehensive plan applies to land 
within the Boulder Valley Planning Area. 
This includes all land within the Boulder 
city limits as well as some surrounding 
land in unincorporated Boulder County. 


--- Page 6 ---
 11
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
10
The Comprehensive Plan and Other Plans
The comprehensive plan plays an integral role in many other plans, programs and decisions within 
the city. Plans that provide greater detail on policies and priorities for specific departments or 
geographies are considered to be sub-elements of the comprehensive plan with the same role 
when evaluating general consistency with the overall vision. Plans that are operational or focused 
on a specific facility (e.g., a water treatment plant) are not considered sub-elements.
Sustainability, Equity and 
Resilience Framework
The city’s Sustainability, Equity, and Resilience 
(SER) Framework reflects core community 
values: caring for people, protecting the 
natural environment, and planning for a strong 
and adaptable future. All other city plans, 
projects, and decisions are rooted in  
this framework.
Citywide Strategic Plan
The Citywide Strategic Plan is step forward 
towards action. This four-year plan identifies 
major strategies and is used alongside City 
Council priorities to coordinate work across 
city departments.
Budget
The city uses an outcome-based budgeting 
approach, also known as Budgeting for 
Resilience and Equity. This approach enables 
the city to use data-driven decision-making to 
understand the impact of funding choices and 
the allocation of resources in support of the 
Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan.
Department Plans
City department plans interpret the vision and 
policies provided in the comprehensive plan 
for specific departments. “Blueprint” plans 
similarly provide interpretation of the 
comprehensive plan, but for broad focus areas 
that cross over departments. They provide 
detailed policies, priorities, service standards, 
asset and system needs, and capital plans to 
create a roadmap for budget and workplan 
priorities within each city department.
Subcommunity and Area Plans
Subcommunity and Area Plans provide 
direction for specific geographic areas. They 
help implement the comprehensive plan and 
offer more specific guidance for anticipated 
land uses, design character, mobility facilities 
and programming. Through the subcommunity 
and area planning process, the city identifies 
underutilized land for new development with 
potential to address community needs. These 
plans assess the location of sites relative to 
transit and jobs, infrastructure needs, 
availability of public facilities and services, and 
transportation capacity.
Capital Improvement Program
Capital improvements carry out 
comprehensive plan policies through the 
provision and maintenance of urban services, 
facilities and public infrastructure. The city 
funds the construction and maintenance of 
assets using a wide range of sources. Funding 
and priorities for construction of capital 
improvements is planned on a six-year 
timeframe through the Capital  
Improvements Program. 
Department Annual Work Plans
City departments prepare a work plan each 
year that is incorporated into the citywide 
annual work plan. Work plans include on-going 
business activities, projects and programs that 
are informed by and support the policies of the 
Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan. 
Development Standards  
and Zoning
The city zoning map assigns a zoning district 
to every parcel of land in the city. The Boulder 
Revised Code (B.R.C., 1981) defines the zoning 
districts and regulates allowable uses, the 
intensity of development and the form of 
structures on a site within the city. The 
county’s zoning code and map regulate 
properties within the Boulder Valley located in 
unincorporated Boulder County. The 
comprehensive plan and Future Land Use Map 
inform decisions about zoning in the  
Boulder Valley. 
Diagram showing how the Sustainability, Equity and Resilience Framework and Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan inform 
other city plans and processes.


--- Page 7 ---
 13
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
12
Who Uses the Comprehensive Plan
Community members 
use the plan to understand the community’s 
long-term vision, gain insight for local 
decisions, investments and opportunities, and 
hold policymakers accountable to  
shared values.
Property owners 
use the comprehensive plan to understand the 
community vision for their neighborhood and 
plan for strategic development and investment 
that could contribute to the community’s goals 
for environmental preservation, design quality, 
mobility, economy and housing.
Elected officials and  
advisory boards
use the plan to set priorities, weigh tradeoffs 
and make informed decisions that are aligned 
with the community’s vision for the future. 
They also use the plan to guide decisions on 
budget and policy priorities, zoning and code 
changes and development applications.
City staff 
use the plan to develop work plans around 
shared goals, guide more detailed planning 
efforts, make updates to regulations, evaluate 
development applications, collaborate with 
county and other agency partners, effectively 
allocate public funds, and provide programs, 
services and capital improvements to help 
achieve the community’s vision.
County staff 
use the plan to understand and communicate 
expectations for the city’s growth and 
development, guide decisions about 
unincorporated lands in the Boulder Valley and 
coordinate and collaborate with the city on 
areas of shared interest.
Community Assembly members discussing recommendations for 15-minute neighborhoods.
Creating the Plan
Community Voices
Community voices were essential to the 
creation of this comprehensive plan. The city 
and county aimed to make this the most 
inclusive Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan 
update process to date. Community 
engagement began in October 2024 and 
continued through plan adoption in June 2026.
The process incorporated a wide range of 
engagement opportunities including 
traditional methods and new approaches to 
reach people who are often underrepresented 
in planning processes.
Throughout the process, the city and county 
used community input, policymaker guidance, 
technical analysis, case studies and 
professional expertise from city and county 
staff to shape the draft plan, while staying 
focused on the core outreach and engagement 
goals of inclusion and equity.
 
Focus on Racial Equity 
For the first time, the city and county applied 
racial equity tools, such as the Rapid Response 
Equity Assessment, to the process and draft 
comprehensive plan policies. These racial 
equity tools guide users through a process to 
ensure equitable decisions and practices. The 
process revealed the potential benefits and 
burdens embedded in draft plan policies and 
was used to inform updates and revisions to 
improve equitable outcomes in the final plan. 
Additionally, the focus on equity provided 
insight into potential opportunities to address 
systemic inequities and potential risks that 
policies could face during implementation of 
the plan.
What is Equity?  
Equity is an intentional, ongoing process of 
evaluating and changing policies, practices 
and systems to eliminate institutional racism 
and address historical disadvantages that 
have disproportionately affected people 
based on gender, sexual orientation, ability, 
class, age, race or ethnicity. Equity is 
achieved when all community members have 
resources and opportunities that they need 
to thrive. Advancing equity focuses on 
leveling the playing field and prioritizing 
efforts that drive towards social justice to 
improve outcomes for all community 
members, particularly those most often 
excluded by government. 
Community members participating in a community-led 
conversation to inform the vision and values of the plan.  
Community members had the opportunity to 
participate in more than 70 engagement 
opportunities resulting in thousands of 
individual comments and points of feedback, 
including workshops, online feedback forms, a 
statistically valid survey, pop-ups at 
community events, community member-hosted 
conversation groups, office hours with city and 
county staff and more. Additionally, the city 
and county partnered with community 
organizations and local artists who helped 
connect with and elevate perspectives of 
historically excluded communities. The team 
also received more than 500 emails from 
individuals and advocacy groups.


--- Page 8 ---
14
 15
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
50 Years of Planning: Looking Back  
and Moving Forward
Over the last 50 years, planning has shaped the Boulder Valley by protecting landscapes, guiding 
changes and creating challenges the community continues to grapple with today. As the Boulder 
Valley Comprehensive Plan marks its 50-year milestone, it is worth exploring how planning and 
the values behind it have evolved, the impacts of choices and lessons for the future. 
1970s to Today: The Last 50 Years 
of Comprehensive Planning
1970s: Managing Growth and 
Protecting Open Space 
City Population: Approximately 67,000 
Values and Drivers of Change: Environmental 
stewardship, growth management 
The 1970s marked a turning point. Rapid post-
World War II growth and concern for the 
region’s natural setting led to the first Boulder 
Valley Comprehensive Plan in 1977. The 
Service Area concept coordinated city-county 
planning and a limit on residential growth of 
2% per year established a framework for 
compact, managed development and rural land 
preservation that continues today.  
These policies successfully limited sprawl and 
protected open space, however, they also 
contributed to rising housing costs and 
reinforced narrow definitions of community 
character that were not equally accessible to 
everyone in the community.  
Foundations: Before 
Comprehensive Planning 
Indigenous Presence –Late 1800s: 
Pre-Euro-American settlement to City 
Establishment
City Population: Less than 5,000 
Values and Drivers of Change: Land 
stewardship, seasonal use, cultural 
connection, property acquisition,  
resource extraction
For more than 10,000 years, Native American 
tribes, most notably the Arapaho and Ute, lived 
in the Boulder Valley. In 1858, Hinono’ei neecee 
Nowoo3 (‘Arapaho Chief Niwot’) told gold-
seekers they could not occupy Indigenous 
land. Despite this, Euro-American settlers 
established Boulder in 1859, violating multiple 
treaties. Forced removal of the First Peoples 
and settler expansion created a legacy of 
displacement that remains with today’s 
Indigenous community members.
Late 1800s–1930s: From Mining Camp 
to College Town 
City Population: Approximately 6,000 (1900) 
to 11,000 (1930)
Values and Drivers of Change: Economic 
survival and opportunity, education, civic 
pride, access to nature, local control
Boulder grew from a mining settlement into a 
college town after the University of Colorado 
opened in 1877. Early land ownership patterns 
were shaped by the arrival of the railroad.
Early efforts to secure open space, including 
Chautauqua and Flagstaff, reflected growing 
civic identity and appreciation for the 
surrounding natural setting of the city. In 1910, 
Boulder’s first formal plan introduced 
boulevards, parks and early zoning, helping 
establish a lasting open space ethic that the 
community still supports today.
1930s–1960s: Post-War Growth and 
Rising Tensions
City Population: Approximately 13,000 (1940) 
to 38,000 (1960) 
Values and Drivers of Change: Economy and 
population boom, rapid housing growth, open 
space protection
After World War II, rapid growth, annexations 
and the arrival of federal research labs 
accelerated change. Concerns about sprawl 
and appreciation for the surrounding 
landscape led to limits on water service on the 
western edge (the Blue Line) and approval of a 
special tax to acquire and maintain open 
space, the first of its kind in the country,  
in 1967.
Early planning established Boulder’s enduring 
open space and growth management ethos. 
These decisions were important and continue 
to provide meaningful environmental 
protection and community benefits. They have 
also often benefited wealthier community 
members while excluding lower-income 
households and communities of color. 
Discriminatory local, state and national 
policies contributed to inequities in housing, 
economic opportunities and access that we are 
still addressing today.
Parade on 1200 Block of Pearl Street c. 1880s. Call No. 869-1-5 Carnegie Library for Local History, Boulder, CO. 
Martin Acres Subdivision Construction c. 1954. Call No. BHS 
207-23-25 Boulder Historical Society, Carnegie Library for Local 
History, Boulder, CO. 
South and Southeast Boulder Aerial c. 1970. Call No. 511-1-4 
Carnegie Library for Local History, Boulder, CO.


--- Page 9 ---
16
 17
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1980s: Urban Design, Downtown 
Vitality and Transportation 
City Population: Approximately 77,000 
Values and Drivers of Change: Livability, 
design quality 
With growth limits largely in place, planning 
during the 1980s shifted from how much the 
city should grow to how it should function and 
feel. Planners focused on urban design, 
downtown vitality, multimodal transportation 
and historic preservation.  
These efforts strengthened Boulder’s sense of 
place and urban experience. At the same time, 
higher development costs and design 
expectations contributed to exclusivity in  
some areas.  
1990s: Balancing Jobs, Housing and 
Neighborhood Character 
City Population: Approximately 84,000 
Values and Drivers of Change: Balance, 
affordability, neighborhood protection 
By the 1990s, much of Boulder’s easily 
developable land had already been built out, 
while job growth, particularly in technology, 
research and the university continued to 
accelerate. Geographic constraints and rising 
demand for jobs and housing intensified 
tensions between affordability, traffic, the 
pace of neighborhood change and  
community character.  
There was growing recognition in the 
community that earlier growth limits, while 
effective at preserving open space, had also 
contributed to rising housing costs and 
increased traffic from commuters who worked 
in Boulder but lived elsewhere, due in part to 
affordability issues. In response, the city 
established its first requirements for 
permanently affordable housing and identified 
rural lands that could eventually support 
future urban development (i.e., Area 
3-Planning Reserve). Even with these 
interventions, maintaining a housing and jobs 
balance was difficult, and the issues of 
affordability and congestion continued to 
get worse. 
2000s: Sustainability, Increased 
Density and Mixed-Use 
City Population: Approximately 94,000 
Values and Drivers of Change: Sustainability, 
compact urban form, climate action 
In the 2000s, Boulder faced the combined 
effects of long-standing growth limits, a 
strong job market and rising awareness of 
climate change. Planning emphasized efficient 
land use, mixed-use development and 
alignment with transit and climate values. 
Efforts like the Transit Village Area Plan 
reflected integrated approaches to higher 
density mixed use, transportation and 
sustainability. At this time, Boulder emerged as 
a national leader in climate change planning, 
but affordability pressures continued  
to intensify.  
2010s: Resilience, Inclusivity, Climate 
Response and Housing Diversity 
City Population: Approximately 98,000 
Core Values and Drivers of Change: Climate 
change, inclusivity, housing options 
Comprehensive Plan updates in the 2010s 
more fully integrated resilience along with 
sustainability. Policies have supported greater 
diversity of housing types, design excellence, 
affordable housing and requiring community 
benefits in exchange for additional height or 
density. Climate response in the city expanded 
including a commitment to an 80% reduction 
in emissions by 2050 and 100% renewable 
electricity by 2030. Planning increasingly 
recognized that environmental leadership and 
a compact urban form must be paired with 
social and economic inclusion. Even so, 
tensions between affordability, growth, traffic 
congestion and ambitious climate goals remain 
central challenges for the Boulder  
Valley community.  
Early 2020s: Pandemic and Disaster 
Response, Equity and Housing Supply 
City Population: Approximately 108,000 
Core Values and Drivers of Change: 
Resilience to major disturbances, economic 
development, equity for all, housing supply 
This period began with a global pandemic that 
resulted in a rapid shift in the way people lived 
and worked. Remote work led to mass 
migrations to lifestyle locations like Colorado 
and Boulder that accelerated rising housing 
costs and widened economic disparities. The 
societal, public health and economic 
challenges of the pandemic were paired with 
increased wildfire and high wind events that 
led the community to place an even higher 
focus on how to improve resilience to major 
disturbances and the impacts of climate 
change. National, state and local efforts to 
increase housing supply as an additional tool 
to address the housing crisis also began to 
take hold.  
Pearl Street Mall opening day in 1977. Call No. 601-2-28 Carnegie 
Library for Local History, Boulder, CO. 
The Holiday neighborhood under construction in 2001 following 
the 1997 North Boulder Subcommunity Plan.
Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad tracks near the Boulder 
Junction neighborhood.


--- Page 10 ---
18
 19
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Community Context and Local Trends
Big-picture trends about Boulder Valley community members – those who live, work and visit the 
area – and how these patterns change over time provide context for the plan. These conditions 
help explain why planning for the future matters and what challenges and opportunities Boulder 
Valley may face over the next 20 years. Understanding where Boulder is today is essential to 
making thoughtful choices about where the community wants to go next.
To guide the policies and future land use strategy that shape the Boulder Valley’s growth over the 
next 20 years, the comprehensive plan relies on population and employment projections from the 
Colorado State Demography Office. Several scenarios were provided by the State Demographer 
to understand a range of possible outcomes based on historic trends. The population projection is 
based on the city of Boulder maintaining its share of the total population within Boulder County 
and the employment projection is based on the city maintaining its proportion of the total jobs 
within the state of Colorado.    
People and Demographics
Most people in the Boulder Valley live in the 
city of Boulder, which functions as a college 
town with a large population of young adults, a 
place with high-paying jobs and high quality of 
life attractive to professionals and families, 
and as a community where many residents are 
approaching retirement and wish to age in 
place. This demographic creates a wide range 
of needs for housing, transportation choices 
and mobility, healthcare access, services and 
public spaces for people in different phases  
of life.
•	
About 121,000 people live in the Boulder 
Valley today, including about 106,900 in the 
city of Boulder. 
•	
Young adults ages 18–29 make up about 
41% of the city’s population, largely due to 
the University of Colorado. 
•	
About 16% of community members are age 
60 or older, and this group is growing. 
•	
About 12% of community members are age 
18 or younger, and this group is shrinking. 
•	
The Colorado State Demography Office 
projects the city’s population could reach 
about 118,800 people in the year 2045. 
While the student population of CU is 
expected to keep Boulder’s population 
relatively young, the growing proportion of 
older adults highlights a need to adapt 
services, housing and infrastructure to 
support residents at all stages of life. 
Additionally, the school-age population is 
declining across the nation and this trend is 
pronounced in Boulder. Enrollment in the 
Boulder Valley School District has decreased 
significantly since 2017, particularly in the 
elementary grades. Fewer children living in 
the community affects neighborhood vitality, 
public school funding and facilities, and 
long-term community sustainability. 
Moving Forward 
Boulder Valley planning has reflected the values and priorities of its time at each update, helping 
create the high quality of life many experience today. At the same time, planning decisions are 
not neutral. They reflect who had access to decision-making and whose voices were heard. Too 
often, Indigenous people, communities of color, lower-income residents, renters, students, 
immigrants, people with disabilities and working families were excluded from meaningful 
participation or directly harmed by policies. Even well-intentioned policies contributed to 
inequality and rising housing costs and limited who could afford to live in the Boulder Valley. 
These patterns continue to affect access to housing, opportunities and civic voice today.
Today, our community recognizes that good planning must go beyond physical design and 
environmental protection. It must also address inequities and remove barriers to participation. 
This Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan aims to address many of these challenges by learning 
from the past and widening participation and belonging today. This next chapter of planning aims 
to create a more inclusive, connected and sustainable future for the Boulder Valley.
The next chapter of planning aims to create a more inclusive, connected and sustainable future for the Boulder Valley.


--- Page 11 ---
20
 21
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Housing
Local Housing 
Housing plays a central role in who can live in 
Boulder, how far people commute and whether 
the community can support its workforce. 
•	
There are about 58,000 homes in the 
Boulder Valley, with roughly 53,000 located 
in the city’s Service Area (Areas 1 and 2). 
•	
Housing types include single-unit detached 
homes, duplexes, townhomes, apartments, 
condominiums, manufactured homes and 
accessory dwelling units. 
•	
About half of all homes are apartments or 
condominiums, while around 40% are 
single-unit detached homes. This mix is 
similar to other peer cities with universities. 
•	
47% of homes in the city are owner-
occupied and 53% are renter-occupied. The 
proportion of for-rent homes is higher than 
the state average of about 34%. 
New Housing 
Since 2015, most of the new housing built in 
the city has been apartments and 
condominiums.  An average of about 370 
homes have been built each year over the past 
decade. Development has been concentrated 
near downtown, Boulder Junction, CU Boulder 
and parts of east, north and south Boulder.
Housing Cost
Housing prices have risen significantly over 
the past decade. In 2025, the median price of 
single-family homes sold in the city was about 
$1.28 million, a 70% increase since 2015. Local 
rents have also gone up, but have moderated 
and started to fall in the last few years. The 
median home rent in the city is around $2,000 
per month. This is higher than the median for 
the county (about $1,900) and the median for 
the state (about $1,700).
Affordable Housing
There are over 4,300 permanently affordable 
homes in the city. That makes up 8.9% of the 
total housing available and serves about 9,500 
residents. Since 2000, the city has added, on 
average, 127 permanently affordable homes 
annually. From 2000 to 2014 about 40% of 
those homes were affordable homeownership 
and around 60% were affordable rental homes, 
serving low, moderate and middle income 
households. Since 2015, that proportion has 
shifted to about 5% affordable homeownership 
and 95% affordable rental homes annually. 
Rising housing costs and limited housing 
choices are closely linked with cost of living 
in Boulder and shaping who can live here. 
The high cost is affecting local commuting 
patterns into and out of the city and county, 
as well as local spending and economics. 
Planning for distributed, diverse housing 
options and a range of price points can 
influence many outcomes, including 
transportation and the economy. 
Transportation
How People Travel
Travel choices shape daily life, safety, and the 
community’s climate impact. People use a 
variety of ways to move around the community, 
including driving, bicycling, using the bus, 
walking and rolling. When looking at the main 
forms of transportation and travel patterns, 
there has been a shift over time.
•	
Single-occupant vehicle (SOV) travel for all 
trips by Boulder residents has declined over 
time. 35% of all trips by residents are in  
an SOV. 
•	
Transit ridership is recovering but remains 
below pre-COVID levels. Transit service 
cuts have not been fully restored, fewer 
employers opt to provide EcoPass transit 
passes to employees, and increased 
teleworking remain factors  
impacting ridership.
•	
18% of Boulder resident trips are on 
bicycles or scooters, with 4% of these trips 
on an e-bike or e-scooter.
•	
More jobs in Boulder are held by non-
resident employees than resident 
employees, and both groups continue to 
travel differently. An estimated 77% of 
non-resident employees use single-
occupancy vehicles to get to their jobs in 
Boulder. Resident employees have better 
access to multimodal options and take 
more multimodal trips to get to work 
compared to non-residents.
•	
Non-resident employees travel over 18 
miles on average to reach jobs in Boulder.
While the behavior of city residents has 
become less dependent on driving alone over 
time, Boulder’s role as a regional job center 
continues to draw workers to the community 
by car. Changing work patterns, accessibility 
of mobility options and availability of local 
housing will continue to influence how 
people move to and through the  
Boulder Valley. 


--- Page 12 ---
22
 23
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Job growth over the past decade has been 
modest, an average less than 0.5% per year 
over the past decade. Job gains were 
concentrated in professional, technical and 
manufacturing sectors. Over the past few 
years, retail, entertainment, and food 
services businesses have seen losses or 
uneven recovery due to several factors 
including changing buying habits and 
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Climate Change and  
Natural Hazards
The Boulder Valley is experiencing climate 
change right now. Recent climate trends in 
Colorado include longer periods of hot and dry 
weather and precipitation uncertainty. Hotter 
and drier weather means that vegetation is 
more prone to wildfires. Uncertain 
precipitation projections reflect the potential 
for unexpected, intense rain events. 
•	
Since 2000, streamflows in the South 
Platte River basin dropped 18% compared 
to a 1951-2000 baseline. 
•	
In the Colorado River basin, streamflows 
have dropped 5%. While supplies go down, 
the demand for water in these basins has 
increased. 
The changing climate and increasing natural 
hazard risks have serious implications for 
community safety, health and wellness. 
Planning for response and recovery while 
working towards reducing risks will help the 
community adapt to the changing conditions. 
Meanwhile, national changes in environmental 
regulation and funding for programs that 
manage pollution of air and water, greenhouse 
gas emissions and the use of protected public 
lands could impact local efforts to adapt to 
climate change and manage natural resources. 
To stay true to Boulder’s environmental values 
and climate action goals, the community may 
have to build greater strength in local and 
regional partnerships. 
Planning Together in the Boulder Valley
Boulder’s natural beauty, sitting against a mountain backdrop, highlighted by the Flatirons and 
foothills to the west, with open space and rural lands extending to the east, north and south is 
one of its defining features.
While the Boulder Valley has undoubtedly changed over the years, the persistence of this form, a 
compact city framed by rural lands, did not happen by chance. The City of Boulder and Boulder 
County have worked together for decades to preserve open space in the Boulder Valley and focus 
urban growth within defined areas. Coordinated planning, shared policies and long-term 
investments in land conservation have shaped a community where development is concentrated 
and the various functions of the surrounding rural lands are protected.
This pattern of a compact city surrounded by natural and rural areas helps define Boulder’s 
strong sense of place, preserves agricultural lands and sustains habitats and biodiversity. 
Neighborhoods, commercial areas, and the University of Colorado campus are connected to both 
farms and foothills and anchored by greenways and urban parks throughout the city. This results 
in a community where urban daily life is closely linked to access to the natural environment and 
rural activities and character are maintained, without the pressure of potential urbanization. 
Community members in both the city and surrounding county areas value this urban and rural 
distinction, and this continues to guide many planning decisions today.
Employment and Business
Boulder’s economy is innovative and diverse, 
supported by major institutions such as the 
University of Colorado and a broad range of 
businesses, including a high concentration in 
advanced technology industries. The area 
serves as a major employment hub along the 
Front Range with more jobs than working-age 
residents. Having businesses in a wide variety 
of industries helps make the local economy 
more resilient.
Employment and Businesses
Boulder has a broad range of businesses, 
including a high concentration in advanced 
technology industries, and serves as a major 
employment hub along the Front Range with 
more jobs than working-age residents. Having 
businesses in a wide variety of industries helps 
make the local economy more resilient. toward 
remote and hybrid work and impact foot 
traffic, street activity and commercial  
area vitality.
•	
About 95,000 jobs and 8,000 employers 
are located in the city of Boulder.
•	
Most businesses are small, and 90% of the 
city’s employers have fewer than  
20 employees.
•	
Only 1.5% of the city’s employers have 100 
or more employees; however, they provide 
46% of jobs in the city.
•	
The Colorado State Demography Office 
projects the city’s employment could reach 
about 123,000 jobs in the year 2045. 
•	
The Colorado State Demography Office 
projects the city’s employment could reach 
about 123,000 jobs in the year 2045. 
A bird’s eye view of downtown Boulder looking toward the Flatirons illustrates how the city and county work together to encourage a 
compact city surrounded by natural and rural lands. 


--- Page 13 ---
24
 25
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Vision and Values
The community was asked to think about the future and identify key issues that the plan 
should address. This sparked big ideas and refined existing priorities. This chapter offers a 
vision statement that expresses what the community aspires to be in the future. It also 
describes seven community values that lead policies throughout the plan and highlights 
topics of community interest. 
CHAPTER 2    Vision and Values
2
Artwork by Cal Brackin


--- Page 14 ---
26
 27
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Vision
Our community works together to 
ensure everyone belongs, to create 
opportunities for all and to sustain 
the health of the Boulder Valley for  
future generations. 
To realize this vision, we will: 
Balance housing opportunities and economic 
activity with natural ecosystems and rural lands.  
Serve as a model for innovation and action as we 
face a changing climate. 
Strengthen physical and social connections that 
are accessible to everyone. 
Embrace our differences and leverage our 
community assets and creative spirit to solve 
tough problems.
A portion of mural artwork titled Future Flourishing by Android and Martha Jones created for the major update to the Boulder Valley 
Comprehensive Plan through Experiments in Public Art. 


--- Page 15 ---
28
 29
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Accessible and Connected
Our sustainable multimodal 
transportation system and open 
access to information connect 
people safely and seamlessly to 
each other and to opportunities.
Economically Vital
Our economy is resilient, inclusive 
and driven by innovation and 
collaboration to benefit all who live, 
work and visit the Boulder Valley.   
Environmentally 
Sustainable
Our community lives in balance with 
nature by committing to clean 
energy, conserving resources and 
preserving and improving the 
ecosystems that support and 
sustain us.
Healthy and Socially 
Thriving
Our community nurtures well-being 
where everyone can meet their 
needs, champions human rights, 
and offers rich opportunities to 
learn, create, connect and enjoy life.
Community Values
The comprehensive plan is grounded in shared community values. These values guide policies, 
land use planning and public investments, helping the community make thoughtful choices about 
our collective future. Through the comprehensive planning process, community members 
reaffirmed these values.
Livable
Our community is a great place to 
live, with safe, well-built homes and 
buildings, and well-maintained 
infrastructure that supports the 
diverse ways people live, work, learn 
and play.
Responsibly Governed
Our government serves with 
integrity, manages resources wisely 
and makes decisions shaped by 
data and inclusive community 
voices, including those historically 
left out. 
Safe
Our community is welcoming and 
inclusive, ensures everyone is safe 
and cared for during emergencies 
and in day-to-day life and provides 
reliable infrastructure to keep our 
air, water and land clean. 
Community Values Shape the Future
Throughout the planning process, several topics rose to the top of community interest and 
discussion. The following section explores these topics and offers a bridge between the 
community values and comprehensive plan policies and future land use strategy. Topic area 
pages are intended to be educational and connect areas of community interest to specific 
policies. This section reinforces the reality that individual policies within the comprehensive plan 
rarely operate independently. Instead, they interact, reinforce one another and at times require 
careful balancing of competing priorities to achieve the community’s vision. 
Protecting natural areas, habitat, scenic vistas and passive recreation is a core community value reinforced by the  
comprehensive plan.


--- Page 16 ---
30
 31
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Community Assembly members gathered during a meeting in 2025. 
Many Boulder community members aspire for 
a future that includes more walkable 
neighborhoods that will ensure the 
community’s environmental health, social 
equity and economic vitality. These aspirations 
also point to cost-effective infrastructure and 
facility investments, a high level of multimodal 
mobility and easy access to employment, 
recreation, shopping and other amenities.
“A diverse, inclusive, and connected community where 
essential services and amenities are easily and equitably 
accessible within 15 minutes for pedestrians of all abilities.”
The assembly identified the following as 
essential components of a 15-minute 
neighborhood:
•	
Community Center: A hub for education, 
social connection and emergency support.
•	
Groceries and Food: Accessible options for 
healthy living.
•	
Parks and Green Space: Places to relax and 
connect with nature.
•	
Mobility Hub: Multi-modal transportation 
options linking neighborhoods.
Additional features that the assembly 
identified to make a 15-minute neighborhood 
flourish include medical services, schools, 
libraries, recreation centers, restaurants, retail, 
public art spaces and community gardens. 
The elements outlined by the Community 
Assembly describe the types of desired uses 
and activities broadly. The elements are not 
mutually exclusive and the scale and format 
will depend on the surrounding context. For 
example, a small café could serve as a 
community center, restaurant, small-scale 
food market, and retail space. 
The city already includes some accessible, 
walkable areas with a mix of housing, parks 
and local businesses. Areas like Downtown 
Boulder, North Broadway and Boulder Junction 
are some examples. Other areas in the city are 
more isolated and require community 
members to travel longer distances to access 
things like food, childcare or other  
daily essentials.
The comprehensive plan incorporates the 
Community Assembly’s recommendations into 
policies and the future land use strategy to 
support evolution of isolated areas to 
15-minute neighborhoods. Community 
members can anticipate that this kind of 
evolution will happen at different scales and 
take place incrementally, over time. 
Explore the following policies to  
learn more: 
•	
Community Character and 
Evolution
•	
Integrated Land Use and 
Transportation
•	
Inclusive, Diverse and Welcoming 
Community
•	
Social Infrastructure
•	
Commercial Activity in 
Residential Areas
•	
Joyful and Community-Centered 
Transportation System
•	
15-Minute Neighborhoods
Community members enjoy outdoor dining in downtown Boulder,  
which has many components of a 15-minute neighborhood.
The Future of 15-Minute Neighborhoods
To explore this concept and build towards 
more community-driven recommendations, the 
city and county launched their first Community 
Assembly, a democratic process that brought 
together 43 randomly selected community 
members for seven full-day sessions. The 
assembly learned from experts, shared lived 
experiences and developed a clear definition 
of a 15-minute neighborhood:


--- Page 17 ---
32
 33
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Agriculture and Food Systems
Throughout the comprehensive planning process, community members consistently identified 
agriculture and the local food system as a priority. Participants draw a link between food and 
issues of affordability, climate resilience, health, cultural heritage, social connection, land 
stewardship and business vitality. Food is a basic essential for life and community access to 
affordable, healthy and culturally relevant food has impacts on the quality of community life and 
the environment.
Agriculture in the Boulder Valley
Both the city’s Open Space and Mountain 
Parks Department (OSMP)and Boulder County 
Parks and Open Space provide extensive and 
diverse agricultural leasing programs that 
support dozens of local farm and ranch 
families and their employees. Agricultural 
leases often include valuable water rights that 
are required to support viable agricultural 
production in Boulder Valley’s semi-arid 
environment. Protecting these working 
landscapes and waters has been critical in 
preserving an important element of the valley’s 
cultural heritage, supporting agricultural 
production and providing opportunities for the 
broader community to purchase locally grown 
foods from individual farmers, farmers 
markets and many local restaurants.
Agricultural operations are diverse and include 
hay and forage production, grain production 
and livestock production on native prairies and 
irrigated pastures. Smaller market farms also 
produce a wide variety of vegetables including 
salad greens, peppers and tomatoes. Other 
products include milk, eggs, honey, chicken 
and pork. Some farms in the Boulder Valley 
also host weddings, farm dinners, and 
educational events as a way to grow 
awareness of local agriculture and to create 
secondary income streams. Promoting 
regenerative agricultural practices helps 
maintain healthy soils and diverse native 
grasslands throughout the Boulder Valley’s 
agricultural and natural landscape.
Local Food System
The food system is generally considered the 
chain of activities connecting food and feed 
production, processing, storage, distribution, 
wholesale and retail sales, consumption and 
waste management. A strong local food 
system can positively impact the resiliency, 
culture, health, economy and environment of 
the Boulder Valley and its surrounding areas.
As the community works towards ensuring 
that all community members have healthy and 
nourishing foods regardless of individual or 
family economic situations or locations, the 
comprehensive plan includes policies that can 
improve and enhance our local food system.
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Open Space Preservation and 
Stewardship
•	
Movement of Goods
•	
Value of Industrial Land
•	
Local Food Production and Access
•	
Urban Agriculture
•	
Infrastructure for Local Food 
Systems
•	
Agricultural Water Delivery
•	
Sustainable and Regenerative 
Agricultural Practices
•	
Agriculture Workforce Support
Where Does Agriculture Happen in the Boulder Valley?
NORTH
NORTH
Agriculture Lease  
(OSMP Ownership)
City and County  
Open Space
Boulder County  
Agriculture Zoning
N.T.S
N.T.S


--- Page 18 ---
34
 35
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Arts, Culture and the Economy
The Boulder Arts Blueprint outlines shared goals to support artists, creative businesses, vibrant 
neighborhoods and cultural life. The vision included in this plan summarizes the community’s 
possibilities and potential for arts, culture and creative endeavors: 
Creative expression is at the core  
of Boulder.
Creativity energizes and renews Boulder’s 
spirit. It is central to the city’s sense of 
self, to its quality of life, to its  
global reputation.
Here, the arts are supported and seen. 
Here, culture threads the fabric of 
everyday life. Here, talent is nourished, 
cultural heritage honored and  
risk-taking embraced.
Boulder’s creative sector is a defining strength 
of the community and a key driver of its 
economic vitality. Boulder County has the 
nation’s third-highest concentration of artists, 
according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
The community is ranked as one of the top 10 
most arts-vibrant medium-sized communities 
in the United States. The Boulder Creative 
Industries Report found that the concentration 
of creative employment in Boulder is three 
times the national average. The community’s 
commitment to Arts and Culture has resulted 
in valuable economic activity – Americans for 
the Arts estimated that the nonprofit arts and 
culture industry generated $115.1 million in 
economic activity in 2022, $53.5 million in 
spending by arts and culture organizations and 
an additional $61.6 million in event-related 
expenditures by their audiences. And the 
opportunity for arts and culture in and for the 
community is growing. The arrival of the 
Sundance Film Festival will further Boulder’s 
future as a creative and economically vital 
place in the west.
The comprehensive plan builds on this 
opportunity and provides policy that can 
support a robust creative and  
cultural economy. 
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Arts and Culture 
•	
Visitor Economy
•	
Night Economy
•	
Experiential Economy
•	
Social Infrastructure
•	
15-Minute Neighborhoods
•	
Imagination Areas
The comprehensive plan also supports place-
based changes that can help this economic 
sector flourish:
•	
Community and Regional Hubs bring 
together housing, retail, offices, and 
cultural spaces in walkable, transit-
connected areas. These hubs create lively 
destinations where residents and visitors 
alike support local businesses, enjoy 
cultural experiences and activate public 
spaces, fostering a vibrant atmosphere and 
a strong local economy.
•	
Innovation and Production Hubs integrate 
light industrial, maker spaces, and housing 
to foster entrepreneurship and creative 
industries while making an effort to retain 
affordable spaces that encourage 
experimentation, creative risk-taking  
and innovation.
Local theater productions are an important asset in  
the community.
The community supports local arts activities such as the Street Wise Arts Mural festival.  


--- Page 19 ---
36
 37
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Housing 
Community members described many interests related to housing throughout the comprehensive 
planning process. Many expressed a desire for more housing choices generally, more affordable 
housing, and more types of homes that could meet the differing needs of families, local 
workforce and older adults. Others voiced concerns about population growth and its potential 
impact on resources, traffic and existing character.
Today, the Boulder Valley includes approximately 58,000 homes. This includes a mix of single-
unit detached homes, duplexes and townhomes, apartments and condominiums, manufactured 
homes, and backyard cottages or accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
Looking Ahead
Looking ahead, regional demand anticipates 
an increased need for housing. The social, 
economic and environmental well-being of the 
community is enhanced when individuals and 
families are retained, housing for those who 
work in Boulder is available and community 
members with changing or special housing 
needs are served.
The high cost of local housing results in many 
households paying a disproportionate amount 
of their income for housing or finding it 
necessary to move farther from their work 
(and sometimes out of Boulder County) to find 
a home that meets their needs and price point. 
Households that find housing costs 
burdensome have less money available for 
other necessities or may find it difficult to 
actively participate in the community.
The comprehensive plan provides key policies 
that can help to support community housing 
needs and influence the type, number and 
affordability of new and existing homes while 
supporting programs and assistance to those 
who have limited resources or special needs. 
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Permanently Affordable  
Housing Goal
•	
Housing Diversity and Supply
•	
Housing and Supportive Services
•	
Community Benefit Associated  
with Annexation
•	
Manufactured Housing
The plan also incorporates the following land 
use strategies to support the above policies:
•	
Context-specific infill and change in 
neighborhoods can sensitively introduce 
opportunities for various housing forms, 
such as duplexes, triplexes, rowhomes, 
cottage courts, backyard cottages (ADUs) 
and multi-unit buildings in areas like 
Neighborhood 1. This strategy can add 
homes over time without significantly 
impacting existing character.
•	
Compact, mixed-use development in Hubs 
can add residential units to areas that were 
previously dominated by commercial uses 
and associated parking. This approach can 
allow more people to live within walking 
distance of amenities and services. This 
could reduce some reliance on cars and 
help manage traffic impacts as more 
people find housing that can meet their 
needs in Boulder.
Community members working on land use strategy.
Local example of a single-unit detached home.
Local example of townhomes. 
Local example of multi-unit homes.


--- Page 20 ---
38
 39
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Natural Infrastructure
As the Boulder Valley experiences more high heat days and more extremes in both precipitation 
and drought, steps are being taken to mitigate the impacts and build resilience in the city. The 
Boulder Valley’s open space system provides extensive and significant ecosystem services 
outside the city, but it is critical to infuse nature into urban environments as well.
Physical infrastructure including roads, parking lots, buildings, sidewalks, and alleyways are 
usually made up of dark and impermeable surfaces contributing to urban heat island effects. 
Built elements frequently concentrate both rainwater and pollutants in ways that can increase 
impacts. Nature-based solutions like trees, bioswales, and rain gardens can be designed in 
proximity to these built features in ways that can mitigate these effects.
Natural infrastructure is a network of natural areas, designed ecosystems and built infrastructure 
that provides essential services, particularly in urban environments, like stormwater 
management, natural cooling, and resilience to extreme weather events, while also supporting 
biodiversity and community well-being. By creating and maintaining natural infrastructure, we 
can cool the city, keep our creeks clean, protect wildlife and integrate community access.
Natural Infrastructure
The community’s natural infrastructure is an interconnected network of living system  
elements that includes:
Section view of Boulder Creek and the 
surrounding areas between 6th and  
9th Street.
Waterways
Creeks, streams, and ponds are integral 
components of the local watershed. They offer 
places for the community to cool off, play and 
support thriving wildlife. Stream restoration 
projects may enhance flood mitigation, public 
safety, and biodiversity in these corridors.
Wetlands
Areas where water collects at or near the 
ground surface near waterways or isolated 
areas that act like natural sponges during wet 
periods by storing and slowing water, filtering 
runoff, and offering critical habitat areas for 
wildlife.
Greenways
Greenways are areas adjacent to existing 
waterways, including Boulder Creek and 
tributary streams, that help manage and 
mitigate flooding, support multifunctional 
landscapes and ecosystem services, and 
protect cultural resources. Greenways may also 
offer recreation and active transportation 
amenities. These areas form an interconnected 
system across public and private lands.
Biodiversity Habitats
Areas that include native and adapted 
grasses and wildflowers to attract 
pollinating insects and offer food  
for animals.
Urban Tree Canopy
A connected canopy of tree vegetation that 
provides shade to cool the urban environment, 
increases rainwater infiltration, captures 
particulate matter, offers wildlife habitat and 
provides opportunities for community 
members to relax and play.
Raingarden, Bioswale, or Bioretention
Shallow basins or channels that collect, slow, and 
filter runoff from roofs, streets, parking lots, and other 
hard surfaces using moisture-tolerant plants and 
absorbent soils. They temporarily hold stormwater, 
capture pollutants, and allow water to soak into the 
ground or drain slowly to the stormwater system.
Moving Forward
Relevant policies in the comprehensive plan 
provide a framework to develop projects, 
methods, and programs to increase and 
enhance natural infrastructure in the city. The 
plan’s Future Land Use map designates areas 
of the Boulder Valley as Greenways, Parks, and 
Open Space that serve as the backbone of the 
community’s connection to nature and 
resilience. Natural infrastructure will continue 
to be enhanced in the city to complement 
these areas and provide benefits at a smaller 
scale in the urban environment.
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Healthy Ecosystems
•	
Wetland and Riparian Areas
•	
Climate Action
•	
Environmental Design in Public 
Projects
•	
Stormwater and Drainageways 
Integrated Management
•	
Greenway Preservation and 
Management
•	
Nature-Based Urban Cooling
•	
Floodplain Management
Plan view of Boulder Creek and the 
surrounding areas between 6th and  
9th Street


--- Page 21 ---
40
 41
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Open Space
Why Open Space Matters
Stewardship and Community Identity
For over a century, the city and county have 
protected the Boulder Valley’s surrounding 
landscapes that define its identity. The city’s 
1898 purchase of land around Chautauqua, 
establishing the Blue Line to limit western 
expansion of the city and voter-approved open 
space taxes by both city and county are only a 
few examples of the long-standing 
commitment to preserve the community’s 
mountain backdrop, grasslands, creeks, 
agricultural lands, and wildlife habitats. Today, 
the open space system covers more than 
38,000 acres of the Boulder Valley Planning 
Area. This is approximately 63% of the total 
area. Many more thousands of acres are 
maintained as open space beyond the 
boundary of the Planning Area.
Critically, this landscape is much more than 
scenery as rural lands provide a variety of 
functions. Open space is the foundation of the 
Boulder Valley’s ecological health, cultural 
heritage, agricultural production and sense of 
place. As defined in city and county codes, 
open space must be preserved for purposes 
such as natural ecosystems, water resources, 
agriculture, passive recreation, cultural 
resources, floodplain protection and  
urban shaping. 
Ecological Health and Climate 
Resilience
The open space system supports extraordinary 
native species biodiversity, providing habitat 
for approximately:
•	
740 plant species
•	
300 bird species
•	
130 butterfly species
•	
60 mammals
•	
20 reptiles/amphibians
•	
Nearly 20 fish species
These lands protect large unfragmented 
habitat areas and corridors that allow wildlife 
to thrive and adapt. They also buffer the 
community from climate change impacts at a 
larger scale by slowing and absorbing 
floodwaters, supporting cooler microclimates, 
and storing carbon in grasslands and soils.
A Haven for Community Well-Being
Residents repeatedly express how deeply they 
value their access to nature. Open space trails 
and passive recreation activities offer 
opportunities for mental and physical health, 
inspiration, and connection. Visitor use 
continues to rise with over 6 million annual 
visits to city-owned open space lands alone, 
which requires strategic planning and 
management of these critical resources. 
Open space preservation and management is 
also fundamental to the on-going success of 
agriculture and the local food system in the 
Boulder Valley. Agricultural leasing programs 
support dozens of local families and 
employees, maintain an important part of our 
shared cultural identity and provide 
opportunities to access healthy locally  
grown foods.
The Comprehensive Plan’s 
Commitment to Open Space
Across the comprehensive plan, open space is 
foundational to Boulder’s environmental 
stewardship, urban form, and community 
resilience. Key commitments include:
•	
Protecting rural and open lands for 
continued environmental health, 
agricultural production and climate 
resilience.
•	
Limiting urban sprawl and maintaining open 
lands as critical buffers that define the 
city’s compact form.
•	
Ensuring future decisions consider 
ecological protection, responsible access, 
agricultural productivity and  
hazard management.
•	
Continuing to fund and prioritize long-term 
active management of natural and 
agricultural lands, as well as  
visitor infrastructure.
How the City and County Address 
Today’s Challenges
On-going stewardship of the city and county’s 
open space system is complex and 
challenging. Many urgent needs, opportunities 
and competing values must be balanced to 
maintain the ecological integrity of habitats 
and agricultural viability in the Boulder Valley 
while also addressing the desires of residents 
and visitors to connect with these special 
places. Five broad focus areas guide the goal 
of preserving the open space system for  
future generations.
•	
Ecosystem Health & Resilience including 
restoring and protecting habitats, 
controlling invasive species, limiting 
fragmentation and actively addressing 
hotter, drier conditions on habitat health. 
•	
Agriculture Today & Tomorrow including 
supporting regenerative agriculture and 
soil health, partnering to maintain ditches 
and irrigation infrastructure and enhancing 
local food production.
•	
Responsible Recreation & Enjoyment 
including planning for increased visitation, 
improving trail access and maintenance, 
protecting sensitive habitats and enhancing 
accessibility for all ages and abilities.
•	
Community Connection, Education & 
Inclusion including expanding 
environmental education and youth 
engagement, strengthening volunteer 
participation, and supporting access and 
connection to ancestral homelands for 
local indigenous community members and 
recognized tribes.
•	
Financial Sustainability including 
maintaining stable funding, prioritizing 
stewardship of open space land already 
owned and making strategic investments in 
acquisitions and maintenance.
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Open Space Preservation and 
Stewardship
•	
Rural Land Preservation
•	
Historic, Archeological and Cultural 
Resources Preservation
•	
Healthy Ecosystems
•	
Wetland and Riparian Areas
•	
Boulder Valley Biodiversity
•	
Trail and Path Networks
Open Space in the Boulder Valley.


--- Page 22 ---
42
 43
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Regional Collaboration
Through this plan and associated 
intergovernmental agreement, the city and 
county have worked collaboratively to achieve 
shared goals over the last 50 years. Looking 
towards the future, this valuable partnership 
will continue to be essential to the future 
success of managing environments that do not 
recognize boundary lines between entities and 
planning for the movement of wildlife, people 
and goods that are in constant motion. The city 
and county work together with the following 
major partners to achieve regional and 
statewide goals: 
•	
State of Colorado
•	
University of Colorado
•	
Regional Transportation District
•	
Colorado Department of Transportation
•	
Denver Regional Council of Governments
•	
Boulder Valley School District
•	
Boulder County Regional Housing 
Partnership 
Regional Connections    
Proposed regional connections represent 
important links for the future of the Boulder 
Valley. These planned or desired connections 
represent a commitment to collaboration 
between agencies involved in comprehensive 
planning in the Boulder Valley. Planned 
connections have been developed at least to a 
minimum level of preliminary conceptual 
design or community discussion, while desired 
connections remain at the vision stage. They 
are used by the city and the county to advance 
regional roadway, transit, multimodal and trail 
connectivity that public agencies hope to 
provide in the future.
The city and county continue to support and 
collaborate on the realization of the following 
regional mobility enhancements which are 
formally recognized within this major update:
•	
Northwest Rail/Front Range Passenger Rail
•	
CO 119 Mobility Improvements
•	
CO 7 Mobility Improvements
•	
US 36 Boulder to Lyons Safety 
Improvements
•	
South Boulder Road Mobility Improvements
•	
CO 93 Mobility Improvements
The following planned and desired regional 
trail connections describe a general direction 
for potential connecting trails. In most cases, 
specific alignments or trail corridors have not 
yet been selected; however, the concept for 
the trail connection itself is supported by the 
city and county. 
•	
Joder Ranch to Heil Ranch
•	
Boulder to Lyons
•	
Boulder Reservoir to Niwot Road
•	
Boulder to Erie Regional Trail (BERT)
•	
East Boulder Trail
•	
Boulder to Lafayette/Louisville
•	
Western Connection
•	
Boulder Creek to Betasso
Explore the following policies to 
 learn more:
•	
City and County Collaboration
•	
Public Institution Coordination
•	
Regional and Statewide 
Collaboration
•	
Multimodal Transportation Strategy
•	
Trail and Path Networks
US 36 Boulder
US 36 Boulder
 to Lyons Safety 
 to Lyons Safety 
Improvements
Improvements
CO  119 Mobility
CO  119 Mobility
 Improvements
 Improvements
Western Connection
Western Connection
S. Boulder Road 
S. Boulder Road 
Mobility Improvements
Mobility Improvements
CO 7 Mobility Improvements
CO 7 Mobility Improvements
Front Range
Front Range
 Passenger Rail
 Passenger Rail
Boulder to 
Boulder to 
Lafayette/Louisville
Lafayette/Louisville
Boulder to Erie Regional Trail (BERT)
Boulder to Erie Regional Trail (BERT)
Boulder Reservoir
Boulder Reservoir
 to Niwot Road
 to Niwot Road
Boulder 
Boulder 
to Lyons
to Lyons
Joder Ranch
Joder Ranch
 to Heil Ranch
 to Heil Ranch
Boulder Creek to Betasso
Boulder Creek to Betasso
East Boulder Trail 
East Boulder Trail 
Planned Future Trail 
Connections
Desired Future Trail 
Connections
Planned Future Mobility 
Connections
Desired Future Mobility 
Connections
CO 93 
CO 93 
Mobility
Mobility
Improvements
Improvements
CO 93
CO 93
US 36
US 36
US 36
US 36
28th St
28th St
Arapahoe Rd
Arapahoe Rd
Baseline Rd
Baseline Rd
S. Boulder Rd
S. Boulder Rd
CO 119
CO 119
US 287
US 287
City of Boulder
Boulder County
Boulder Valley 
Planning Area
Open lands
Future Planned and Desired Regional Connections
NORTH
NORTH
N.T.S
N.T.S


--- Page 23 ---
44
 45
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of the City’s Water Supply
Long-term Planning
Boulder has planned carefully over the years 
to ensure a reliable community water supply 
guided by comprehensive plan policies and 
planning projections. The comprehensive plan 
lays a foundation for the city’s approach to 
water supply planning, which is informed by 
the Colorado Water Plan and further detailed 
in the following city plans:
•	
2009 Source Water Master Plan
•	
2022 Drought Plan
•	
2023 Water Efficiency Plan
•	
2023 Source Water Protection Plan
 
Municipal Water Supply Sources
The City of Boulder is the primary water 
provider for developed lands within Areas 1 
and 2. The city provides high-quality, reliable 
municipal water by diverting raw (untreated) 
water from its source areas, treating it at one 
of the city’s two water treatment plants and 
distributing it through pipelines to customer 
taps. Proactive and forward-looking water 
supply planning, management and operations 
ensures adequate water deliveries to the water 
treatment plants under a range of conditions.
Boulder’s water supply comes from three 
sources: Middle Boulder Creek and North 
Boulder Creek (in the South Platte River basin) 
and the Colorado River basin through projects 
managed by the Northern Colorado Water 
Conservancy District. On average, about one-
third of the municipal water supply comes 
from each of these sources, using a 
combination of water rights specific to each.
Boulder’s diversity of sources and water rights 
provides operational flexibility and system 
redundancy, allowing the city to meet water 
demands under variable conditions, such as 
seasonal or annual variation in precipitation 
and temperature or system outages due to 
planned maintenance or unexpected events 
such as wildfire.
Boulder’s water supply is shaped by the 
natural variability of precipitation and 
streamflow. Much of the region’s precipitation 
falls as snow, and when the snowpack melts in 
the spring and early summer, streamflows are 
high. During this runoff period, much of the 
city’s water demand can be met directly from 
the streams. Because these high flows last 
only a few months, Boulder captures and 
stores water in reservoirs during wetter 
periods for use later in the year. As runoff 
subsides and streamflows decline in late 
summer, fall and winter, natural streamflow is 
not sufficient to meet municipal demand.
During these times, the city supplements 
stream diversions with water released from 
storage. City reservoirs also serve as a buffer 
against drought and therefore are not 
completely drained every year, ensuring a 
drought reserve. On a daily basis, the city 
considers water availability, water rights, water 
quality, legal requirements, hydroelectric 
generation potential and infrastructure 
capacity when determining which sources to 
use to meet water demand.
Because developing new water supplies is 
both time- and cost-intensive, Boulder’s water 
supply planning must look decades ahead to 
ensure future needs can be met. This forward-
looking approach requires making informed 
assumptions about many unknowns. Key areas 
of uncertainty include future climate 
conditions, potential changes in Colorado River 
management that could reduce water 
allocations to Front Range communities like 
Boulder, and how land use and water demand 
may evolve within the city.
Water Conservation and  
Drought Planning 
Changing climate conditions make it 
increasingly important to conserve water. The 
city’s Water Conservation Program provides a 
variety of services and resources to help 
customers use water efficiently in and around 
the city. This program is informed by the 
Colorado Water Plan and guided by the city’s 
Water Efficiency Plan. The city’s Drought Plan 
provides guidance for recognizing and 
responding appropriately to droughts that 
affect water supply availability. 
An Integrated Water Supply Plan
The city will develop an Integrated Water 
Supply Plan to guide Boulder’s approach to 
maintaining risk resilience and meeting future 
demands based on the policies in the 
comprehensive plan. As an update to the 2009 
Source Water Master Plan, the IWSP will 
include quantification of water demands based 
on the land use designations and policies of 
the comprehensive plan, and, as appropriate, 
recommend updates to Boulder’s water 
policies. A major focus area is expected to be 
the evaluation and prioritization of investments 
and policies to enhance water conservation 
and increase water supply in light of  
future uncertainties. 
Explore the following policies to  
learn more: 
•	
Boulder Valley Planning Areas
•	
Provision of Urban Facilities and 
Services
•	
The Blue Line
•	
Water Quality Protection and 
Improvement
•	
Water Resources Planning
•	
Agricultural Water Delivery
Boulder Creek provides important habitat, recreation, flood management and water supply resources to the community.
Silver Lake is one of the city’s reservoirs. 


--- Page 24 ---
46
 47
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Resilience to Natural Hazards 
Boulder’s location at the edge of the Rocky Mountains is one of the community’s defining 
features. Forested foothills, open space, waterways, and natural landscapes provide habitat, 
recreation and scenic beauty. These systems also shape the community’s exposure to natural 
hazards – particularly flooding and wildfire.
Flood
The city is home to Boulder Creek, its 14 
tributaries and Boulder Slough (diverted water 
from Boulder Creek to satisfy irrigation 
company water rights). Due to its geographic 
location and features, the city of Boulder has 
the highest risk of flash flooding in the state of 
Colorado. Events such as the September 2013 
flood led to loss of life and widespread 
damage. Many neighborhoods throughout the 
city experience flooding during storms, and 
some are at a higher risk of extreme flooding 
because they are located near a  
major drainageway. 
Fire
Fire is a natural part of Colorado’s ecosystems, 
including forests and grasslands, however, 
drought, wind, insect impacts, and patterns of 
development have increased the potential for 
large, fast-moving, and destructive fires. 
Events such as the 2021 Marshall Fire 
demonstrated how wildfire and urban 
conflagration can have destructive impacts, 
such as loss of homes and businesses as well 
as negative impacts to air and water quality. 
Several factors influence fire risk in the 
Boulder Valley:
•	
Vegetation and fuels – Forests, grasslands, 
and landscaping can accumulate dry fuels. 
•	
Weather and climate – Hot, dry conditions, 
low humidity, and strong winds increase 
fire intensity and ember spread. 
•	
Topography – Terrain can influence how 
quickly fire moves. 
•	
Development patterns – Building materials, 
site design, and proximity to open space 
affect how fires spread within 
neighborhoods. 
•	
While fire risk cannot be eliminated, it can 
be reduced through coordinated planning 
and action.
Reducing Risk Across  
Multiple Hazards
Boulder addresses wildfire, flooding, and other 
hazards, such as extreme weather, drought and 
heat, through coordinated strategies that span 
land management, infrastructure, and 
emergency planning.
Examples include:
•	
Managing forests and open space to 
reduce wildfire fuels 
•	
Maintaining and improving stormwater 
systems and flood conveyance 
•	
Protecting and restoring natural systems 
that reduce hazard impacts 
•	
Planning for emergency response, 
evacuation, and recovery 
These efforts recognize that natural systems 
– such as forests, grasslands, and waterways – 
play an important role in both creating and 
reducing risk.
Preparing Homes  
and Neighborhoods
Community preparedness is one of the most 
effective ways to reduce hazard impacts. When 
homes and neighborhoods are better prepared, 
communities are more resilient to a range of 
hazards. Property owners, neighborhoods, and 
local governments all play a role.
Key actions include:
•	
Creating defensible space and reducing 
wildfire hazards around homes 
•	
Using fire-resistant materials and resilient 
building practices 
•	
Understanding flood risk and protecting 
structures where appropriate 
•	
Improving emergency preparedness, 
evacuation planning, and communication 
 
Natural hazards will remain part of Boulder’s 
future. Planning for that reality means 
integrating wildfire, flood, and other risks into 
decisions about land use, development, 
infrastructure, and environmental 
management.
Explore the following policies to  
learn more:
•	
Climate Action
•	
Stormwater and Drainageways 
Integrated Management 
•	
Greenway Preservation and 
Management 
•	
Consideration of Hazards 
•	
Floodplain Management 
•	
Energy Resilience during 
Emergencies 
•	
Resilient Infrastructure 
•	
Disasters and Public Health Risks 
•	
Fire Adapted Communities 
What is urban conflagration? 
Urban conflagration results when 
wildfire spreads rapidly into urbanized 
areas moving from building to building. 
Flood risks are managed through natural and built infrastructure 
to protect the community. 
Firefighters work to extinguish a wildland fire near the city.


--- Page 25 ---
48
 49
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Future of Transportation 
Connecting People, Places, and Opportunity in Boulder
Transportation shapes daily life. It determines 
whether people can easily access jobs, 
schools, healthcare, parks and community 
spaces. Boulder’s strong base of walking, 
biking and transit use reflects decades of 
strategic planning and intentional investment 
to improve the local climate, air quality and 
travel options. The city is dedicated to building 
a people-first transportation system where 
everyone of all mobility levels can get where 
they need to go safely and reliably. The 
community has the following major goals  
for transportation:  
•	
Be SAFE
•	
Be EQUITABLE
•	
Be RELIABLE
•	
Provide travel CHOICES
•	
Support clean air and our CLIMATE 
COMMITMENT
Today, Boulder’s mobility system faces some 
challenges and opportunities:
•	
Since the COVID-19 pandemic travel 
patterns have changed. Many more workers 
are teleworking and transit service 
restoration efforts continue. 
•	
Employees working in Boulder are now 
traveling farther to reach jobs in Boulder 
than in the past
•	
Arterial streets have not historically 
prioritized multimodal safety and now 
account for 67% of traffic crashes resulting 
in serious injury or fatality. 
•	
Our community requires transportation that 
works for people who cannot or choose not 
to drive a car alone.
•	
The city’s vision for 15-minute 
neighborhoods depends on strong 
multimodal connections. 
What’s Next 
There is a lot of opportunity for transportation 
as the community looks to the horizon. Many 
regional transportation connections, 
developed through inter-agency partnerships, 
are coming to fruition. The planned Colorado 
Connector passenger train, several regional 
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridors and key 
regional trails are approaching implementation 
in the near future. Safety-focused 
improvements in corridors on the Core Arterial 
Network (CAN) and multimodal operational 
improvements across the system will ensure 
Boulder can accomplish its Vision Zero safety 
goal. Strong transportation demand 
management (TDM) policies and mobility 
technology will continue to make headway on 
improving travel experiences and reducing 
GHG emissions. Innovative pilots can blossom 
into programs that advance Boulder’s 
reputation as a multimodal transportation 
leader. A growing number of community 
members express interest in trying new ways 
to access destinations outside of a car. 
The city’s streets, transit service and stops, 
paths, sidewalks, bike lanes, shared 
micromobility options (like scooters and 
e-bikes), traffic signals and the airport are the 
backbone of the city’s transportation system 
- and will continue to be managed to ensure 
moving in and around Boulder is safe, 
equitable and reliable. 
As the comprehensive plan considers these 
current challenges and future opportunities, 
there are multiple policies that will help inform 
future decisions about mobility across the 
Boulder Valley. 
Check out the following policies to learn 
more: 
•	
 Joyful and Community-Centered 
Transportation System 
•	
Multimodal Transportation 
Strategy
•	
Transportation Safety and  
Vision Zero
•	
Innovative Transportation for All
•	
Movement of Goods
•	
Curbside Management Parking
•	
Compact Urban Form
•	
15-minute neighborhoods
•	
Integrated Land Use and 
Transportation
•	
Municipal Airport
The city’s Transportation Master Plan dives 
into more specific policies, metrics and actions 
to lead transportation planning and investment 
into the future and addresses a range of 
topics, such as:
•	
Complete Streets
•	
Reduction of Single Occupancy Auto 
Trips
•	
Accessibility and Mobility for All 
•	
Investment Priorities
•	
Transportation Demand Management 
Programs
•	
Emergency Response Access 
Separated and protected bicycle lanes are an important component of the community’s multi-modal mobility system and  
Vision Zero goals.


--- Page 26 ---
50
 51
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Policies
Interpreting Policy
Comprehensive plan policies expand on the Community Values providing guidance and 
direction for achieving the Vision of the plan. Policies contained in the plan indicate how 
the community should evolve over the next 20 years. The policies are not prioritized and no 
one policy or set of policies must be satisfied by any one action, ordinance, regulation, 
development application or program. There are inherent competing values among the 
policies that require careful analysis and consideration of tradeoffs when implementing 
the plan in various ways.
CHAPTER 3    Policies
3
Artwork by Cal Brackin.


--- Page 27 ---
52
 53
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1. 
Equity and Racial Justice
The city and county work to dismantle 
institutional and systemic racism and are 
committed to ensuring all voices, experiences, 
and needs of community members are fully 
and equitably heard and considered, including 
those of communities that have been 
historically excluded from local government. 
The city and county will work to reduce the 
vulnerabilities of people most susceptible to 
natural or human-caused stressors. Equity is a 
primary consideration for city investments in 
engagement, infrastructure, programming,  
and maintenance. 
2. 
City and County Collaboration
The city and county collaborate to implement 
the shared goals described in this plan and 
other respective adopted policies and plans 
and mitigate cross-jurisdictional impacts. 
3. Public Institution Coordination
The city coordinates with public institutions 
like the University of Colorado, Boulder Valley 
School District, Boulder Public Library District 
and federal research laboratories to address 
critical needs and align future plans that 
support shared values. 
4. Regional and Statewide 
Collaboration
The city and county pursue cooperative 
regional planning, intergovernmental 
agreements and shared initiatives to address 
the needs of the Boulder Valley. The city and 
county will collaborate with partner agencies 
across the region and state to advance shared 
goals and actions. 
5. Boulder Valley Planning Areas
The city and county establish the joint vision 
for urban growth and rural preservation within 
the Boulder Valley through a framework of 
defined Planning Areas. For these purposes, 
the Service Area is defined as Area 1-Urban 
Lands and Area 2-Urban Edge. 
a. Area 1-Urban Lands refers to land within 
the city of Boulder tharefers to land within 
the city of Boulder that is currently or 
planned to be served by the full range of 
urban facilities and services and where new 
urban development can occur. 
b. Area 1-Open Lands refers to publicly 
owned land within the city of Boulder 
where new urban development is not 
supported by the plan and that is intended 
to remain rural in character. Limited 
facilities and services may be provided to 
these lands if consistent with this plan, or a 
full range of services may be provided for 
health, welfare and safety reasons. 
c. Area 2-Urban Edge refers to 
unincorporated Boulder County lands 
where annexation to the city is supported 
by the plan. New urban development is not 
supported, and the full range of urban 
services will not be provided by the city. 
Limited facilities and services may be 
provided if consistent with this plan. 
d. Area 3-Rural Preservation refers to land 
within unincorporated Boulder County that 
is intended to remain rural in character. 
New urban development is not supported, 
and this area will not be served by the full 
range of urban facilities and services. 
Annexation to the city is not allowed except 
in limited circumstances as described by 
this plan. 
e. Area 3-Planning Reserve refers to land 
within unincorporated Boulder County that 
may be considered for future expansion of 
the Service Area per the policies of this 
plan and procedures included in the 
intergovernmental agreement between the 
city and county.
Planning Area
Provision of  
City Services
Eligible for  
Annexation
Eligible for  
New Urban 
Development
Area 1-Urban Lands                              Yes                              N/A                              Yes       
Area 1-Open Lands                            Limited*                        N/A                               No                 
Area 2-Urban Edge                           Limited                          Yes                                No                   
Area 3-Rural Preservation                  No                                No                                No                           
Area 3-Planning Reserve                    No                                No                                No                                    
Boulder Valley Planning Areas Map
* The full range of city 
services may be provided 
to Area 1-Open Lands 
locations that are annexed 
for health, safety and 
welfare reasons.
Boulder County
City Limits
NORTH
NORTH
N.T.S
N.T.S
The Blue Line
Arapahoe Rd
Arapahoe Rd
Diagonal Hwy 119
Diagonal Hwy 119
Denver Boulder Turnpike
Denver Boulder Turnpike
South Boulder Rd
South Boulder Rd
Broadway
Broadway
Iris Ave
Iris Ave
Canyon 
Canyon 
Blvd
Blvd
Foothills Pkwy
Foothills Pkwy
28th St
28th St
Baseline Rd
Baseline Rd


--- Page 28 ---
54
 55
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
6. New Urban Development
The city and county only allow new urban 
development in Area 1-Urban Lands. New 
urban development is only allowed if adequate 
facilities and services are available or 
anticipated by the city through the Capital 
Improvements Program. 
7. 
Development in Area 2-Urban Edge 
The county regulates development and 
redevelopment in Area 2-Urban Edge as 
allowed by the Boulder County Land Use Code. 
The county will not allow new urban 
development in Area 2-Urban Edge. 
Annexation into the city and a change to Area 
1-Urban Lands, shall be required prior to or 
concurrent with any approval for new urban 
development. The county sends applications 
for development in Area 2-Urban Edge to the 
city for comment. 
8. Development in Area 3-Rural 
Preservation and Area 3-Planning 
Reserve
The county regulates development and 
redevelopment in Area 3-Rural Preservation 
and Area 3-Planning Reserve as allowed by 
the Boulder County Land Use Code. The county 
will not allow over-intensive rural development 
or new urban development in Area 3-Rural 
Preservation or Area 3-Planning Reserve. The 
county sends applications for development in 
Area 3-Rural Preservation and Area 
3-Planning Reserve to the city for comment. 
9. No New Incorporated Places
The city and county oppose the establishment 
of new incorporated communities within the 
Boulder Valley Planning Area. 
10. Annexation
The city will not annex properties outside the 
boundaries of the Boulder Valley Planning 
Area. Annexations are primarily initiated 
through a property owner petition process 
except as otherwise allowed by state law 
including, but not limited to, annexation of 
enclaves and city-owned property. 
Properties located in Area 2-Urban Edge are 
eligible to be considered for annexation and a 
change to Area 1-Urban Lands. The city 
encourages annexation of the following types 
of Area 2-Urban Edge properties: 
•	
Properties entirely contained within the city 
(enclaves), substantially developed 
properties along the western boundary that 
are below (east of) the Blue Line and other 
substantially developed properties 
adjacent to the city. 
•	
Properties that resolve an issue of public 
health concern without creating additional 
development impacts. 
•	
Properties that offer significant 
development or redevelopment potential if 
they offer a special opportunity or 
community benefit to the city. 
The city allows annexation and a change to 
Area 1-Open Lands of Area 3-Rural 
Preservation or Area 3-Planning Reserve 
properties only in the following circumstances: 
•	
Publicly-owned properties that will remain 
rural in character and require less than a 
full range of urban services or that are 
included under city jurisdiction for health, 
welfare and safety reasons.  
•	
Portions of modestly sized privately owned 
parcels located in Area 3-Rural 
Preservation if they are annexed with 
portions of the same parcel located in Area 
2-Urban Edge to avoid split jurisdiction.
11. Community Benefit Associated  
with Annexation
The city considers the annexation of land with 
significant development or redevelopment 
potential only if it offers a special opportunity 
or benefit to the city. The creation of 
permanently affordable housing will be 
emphasized as a community benefit, but other 
benefits such as preservation of significant 
environmental and/or historic resources, 
dedication of land and/or facilities for public 
purposes, improvement of public health 
conditions, or other community benefits may 
also be considered. As part of annexation, the 
city will not require properties with existing 
development that are seeking no greater 
density or building size to provide the same 
level of community benefit until an application 
for greater development is submitted. 
12. Service Provision to Annexations
The city requires annexation before the full 
range of urban facilities and services are 
provided. The city may provide new services 
and facilities in phases to substantially 
developed areas that are annexed and may 
require upgrades to meet city standards if they 
are needed to protect community health and 
safety. The city and county collaborate with 
urban service providers to reduce duplication 
of efforts, and to maximize economic and 
resource efficiencies  to provide the public 
with reliable and equitable levels of service. 
13. Provision of Urban Facilities  
and Services
The City of Boulder should be the sole provider 
of the full range of urban facilities and 
services for new urban development. Urban 
facilities and services provided by the city are 
public water, public sewer, stormwater and 
flood management, urban fire protection and 
emergency medical care, urban police 
protection, urban transportation and urban 
parks. The city will locate improvements 
necessary to deliver urban services, where 
reasonably practicable, within the  
municipal boundary. 
14. Timing of Urban Services for  
Urban Development
The city requires adequate urban facilities and 
services based on established level of service 
standards to be available prior to or concurrent 
with new urban development and 
redevelopment. 
15. Development to Pay Fair Share of 
New Facility Costs
The city plans and invests in urban facilities 
and services as determined by the Capital 
Improvements Program. New urban 
development or redevelopment is expected to 
pay its fair share, including the cost of 
providing necessary facilities and an equitable 
share of services.
A view of the foothills looking west across Boulder Reservoir.


--- Page 29 ---
56
 57
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
16. Out-of-City Utility Service
The city will consider providing limited water 
and sewer services to Area 2-Urban Edge only 
if consistent with the city’s annexation policies 
and Capital Improvements Program. City 
facilities located in Area 2-Urban Edge, Area 
3-Rural Preservation or Area 3-Planning 
Reserve may be provided with limited urban 
services if consistent with this plan, or as 
otherwise necessary for the city to provide 
another urban facility and service to the city. 
Nothing within this plan prohibits the city from 
denying the provision of urban services to any 
property within the Boulder Valley for utility-
related reasons.
17. The Blue Line
The city does not provide public water or sewer 
infrastructure and associated services above 
(west of) the Blue Line. In 2016, the city 
adopted Ordinance 8133 to change the 
location of the Blue Line. Ordinance 8133 was 
intended to clarify the location of the Blue Line 
and permit water service to existing 
development in the area. Land in Area 2-Urban 
Edge that was moved below (east of) the Blue 
Line with Ordinance 8133 shall be considered 
substantially developed and no additional 
dwelling units may be added upon annexation. 
18. Assimilation of Special District 
Facilities and Services
The city will take all reasonable and legal 
steps to assimilate the facilities and services 
of special districts and other service providers 
by the city upon annexation of Area 2-Urban 
Edge lands. 
19. Land Use Regulations Compliance
The city and county abide by existing 
applicable land use regulations, where 
reasonably practicable, when owning and 
operating public facilities in the  
other’s jurisdiction. 
20. Maintaining Existing Assets
The city maintains and cares for existing city 
assets and recognizes the long-term 
investment community members have made in 
shared public facilities, public spaces  
and infrastructure. 
21. Projections for Planning
The city works with the Colorado State 
Demography Office to develop projections of 
the city population and employment for 20 
years into the future. Projections are based on 
trends and will be used to anticipate long-term 
changes, analyze issues and opportunities that 
could occur during this period, plan for long-
term infrastructure needs and coordinate 
Boulder Valley planning with regional and 
state projections. 
22. Open Space Preservation  
and Stewardship
The city and county preserve lands for open 
space purposes, as defined by the city charter 
or tax-enabling language, by purchasing or 
accepting donations of fee simple interests, 
conservation easements or development rights 
and other measures as appropriate and 
financially feasible. The city and county 
steward these lands to ensure ongoing 
protection, maintaining their value for open 
space purposes into the future.
23. Rural Land Preservation
The city and county preserve rural land uses 
and character in the Boulder Valley including 
natural settings and ecosystems, agriculturally 
significant lands, hazard areas, vistas, 
significant cultural and historic resources and 
established rural residential areas. 
24. Community Character  
and Evolution
The city works with the community to shape 
how different areas evolve over time in varying 
ways and degrees. Change across the 
community will contribute to the unique and 
authentic character of different areas while 
supporting citywide goals. 
25. Continued Use and Adaptive Reuse 
The city encourages the continued use and 
reuse of existing buildings for new purposes to 
recognize local history and architecture, 
activate vacant or under-utilized spaces, 
contribute to neighborhood activity and retain 
embodied carbon by reducing demolition and 
the creation of unnecessary building  
material waste. 
26. Compact Urban Form
The city and county work together to ensure 
urban development is focused within Area 
1-Urban Lands to utilize existing urban 
services, maintain a clear boundary between 
urban and rural areas and avoid patterns of 
leapfrog, noncontiguous, scattered 
development within the Boulder Valley. The 
city encourages redevelopment and infill 
within municipal boundaries alongside 
consideration of managed expansion of the 
Service Area, as allowed by Area 2-Urban 
Edge and the Area 3-Planning Reserve, to 
create a compact city and prevent the negative 
consequences of urban sprawl. 
Boulder Junior Rangers prepare to assist with open  
space stewardship. 
Community members work on comprehensive plan concepts.


--- Page 30 ---
58
 59
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
27. Integrated Land Use  
and Transportation
The city aligns land use and transportation 
planning to integrate a variety of 
neighborhoods with a range of uses into a well-
connected, safe, local and regional network of 
mobility choices. The city supports higher 
activity near multimodal corridors and transit 
centers that provide enhanced mobility 
choices and facilities. The city and county 
collaborate on transit investments and 
improvements so that local and regional 
transit systems are well integrated. 
28. Inclusive, Diverse and  
Inviting Community
The city and county work to foster a diverse, 
inclusive and inviting community, recognizing 
that diversity strengthens community well-
being and long-term resilience. Policies and 
programs support equitable access to housing, 
employment, education, services, and public 
spaces, ensuring that all community members 
can fully participate and thrive throughout the 
Boulder Valley. 
29. 15-Minute Neighborhoods
The city encourages the evolution of 
“15-minute neighborhoods.” 15-minute 
neighborhoods are diverse, inclusive and 
connected areas in which services and 
amenities are easily and equitably accessible 
within 15 minutes from home for pedestrians 
of all abilities. The city encourages 
improvements that can enhance access to 
services and amenities, especially in areas that 
are currently underserved. 
30. Urban Natural Infrastructure
The city promotes and maintains a network of 
high-quality natural infrastructure including 
waterways, open lands, parks, urban tree 
canopy, and plant and habitat corridors to 
integrate environmental, social, health and 
recreation functions. 
31. Historic, Archaeological and 
Cultural Resource Preservation
The city and county identify, evaluate, 
designate, and steward historic places, 
archaeological resources, and cultural 
landscapes to connect the past with the future 
and support sustainability, equity and 
resilience. Preserving intangible cultural 
heritage such as traditions, practices, 
knowledge, and living relationships to place, 
elevating diverse stories that foster a shared 
sense of belonging and shaping how places 
change over time honors the full diversity of 
the Boulder Valley to help the community 
understand where it has been, where it is, and 
where it is going.  
32. Healthy Ecosystems
The city and county sustain healthy 
ecosystems and biodiversity within the 
Boulder Valley by integrating ecological values 
into planning and land management. The city 
and county actively and intentionally restore 
and manage important lands, encourage 
regenerative agricultural practices and 
consider environmental factors alongside 
community development activity.  
33. Wetland and Riparian Areas
The city and county recognize wetlands and 
riparian areas as vital ecological and 
community assets. The city and county have 
programs that identify, improve, restore and 
protect the value that wetlands and riparian 
areas provide the Boulder Valley. The city 
strives for no net loss of wetlands and riparian 
areas in the Boulder Valley through the city’s 
wetland regulations that discourage 
development in wetlands and provide guidance 
on minimizing and mitigating any impacts. 
34. Climate Action
The city and county prioritize climate action 
that reduces and works to eliminate the 
production of climate warming emissions while 
growing the community’s resilience and 
adaptive capacity, preparing people, buildings, 
infrastructure and natural systems for 
changing conditions. The city recognizes that 
those least responsible for climate change 
often face the worst impacts. The city will 
advance climate justice by prioritizing support 
for those most affected by climate impacts 
and advance climate equity by distributing 
resources, benefits and burdens of climate 
actions in ways that ensure everyone has a  
fair outcome. 
35. Environmental Design in  
Public Projects
The city and county plan and design public 
buildings, facilities and infrastructure that 
integrate nature-based solutions and natural 
infrastructure elements to enhance natural 
systems, increase biodiversity, increase 
resilience to hazards, reduce urban heat, 
increase energy efficiency and reduce carbon 
emissions, improve water use efficiency, 
manage stormwater and provide health and 
social benefits for community members.
Boulder Creek offers a biodiverse landscape with opportunities for recreation. 
Pearl Street is a historic and cultural asset in the community.


--- Page 31 ---
60
 61
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
36. Boulder Valley Biodiversity
The city and county recognize that community 
well-being and environmental health are 
interdependent. The city and county consider 
the protection and enhancement of 
biodiversity in decision-making, ensuring that 
future policies, programs and projects 
contribute to the long-term health and 
resilience of local ecosystems and urban 
settings that may benefit from a diversity of 
both native and non-native species. The city 
and county further support biodiversity 
through the preservation of rural lands and 
open space to reduce the fragmentation of 
landscapes and maintain larger  
connected ecosystems. 
37. Design Excellence for all Projects
The city expects urban development and 
public places to be designed and built to 
achieve high standards of excellence. New 
public and private projects should respond to 
and enhance Boulder’s unique sense of place, 
including its natural resources and 
ecosystems, architectural character and 
significant historic and cultural resources. 
38. Imagination Locations
The city recognizes that areas with distinct 
character, and oftentimes atypical or unusual 
design, provide a special connection to place 
and embrace the diversity and creativity of the 
Boulder community. The city values such 
places and encourages imaginative 
architecture, cutting-edge technologies and 
use of creative tools and strategies in limited 
circumstances to allow for their creation  
or preservation.
39. Stormwater and Drainageways 
Integrated Management
The city manages stormwater and flood risk 
through a comprehensive approach that 
emphasizes site-level drainage practices and 
the safe conveyance of flows through Boulder 
Creek and its tributaries. Urban development 
incorporates stormwater practices, such as 
natural infrastructure, that slow, absorb, store 
and treat runoff at the source. 
40. Greenway Preservation  
and Management
The city preserves and manages greenways to 
manage and mitigate flooding, support 
multifunctional landscapes and ecosystem 
services, protect cultural resources and offer 
passive recreation and off-street multi-use 
transportation amenities. 
41. Nature-Based Urban Cooling and 
Heat Management
The city enhances and maintains tree canopy, 
healthy vegetation and other cooling strategies 
to reduce the impacts of extreme heat. Efforts 
to improve or increase cooling and heat 
management strategies will prioritize 
vulnerable populations while balancing the 
need for wildfire risk reduction and  
water conservation. 
42. Water Quality Protection  
and Improvement
The city and county prioritize source water 
protection and watershed planning efforts to 
protect and improve water quality of creeks 
and reservoirs for drinking water, aquatic life, 
agricultural uses and recreation. The city will 
pursue wastewater treatment processes to 
achieve water quality improvements, energy 
efficiencies and resource recovery, including 
biosolids reuse. 
43. Water Resources Planning
City water resource planning efforts consider 
climate change, have a regional perspective 
and use a variety of strategies including water 
conservation, infrastructure improvements, 
water-efficient land use policies, water leasing 
and water acquisition to meet municipal uses 
and open space and agricultural goals. The city 
seeks to achieve the water supply reliability 
criteria through water supply and demand 
management while balancing in-stream flow 
maintenance and preservation of irrigated 
agriculture. The city seeks to minimize or 
mitigate the environmental, agricultural and 
economic impacts of its water rights 
acquisitions, including avoiding the dry-up of 
irrigated lands that permanently converts 
agricultural water to municipal and  
industrial uses.
44. Invasive Species Management
The city and county work to prevent and 
manage the introduction and spread of 
invasive plant and animal species that pose a 
risk to native species and communities, public 
health and/or ecosystem health. Management 
strategies are chosen to minimize impacts on 
human health, the environment and non-target 
organisms. The city uses integrated pest 
management and other best practices to 
balance protection of biodiversity and critical 
ecosystem services with human safety and 
community needs. 
Artwork titled Proboscis Paradise by Molly Gambardella.
Large unfragmented native habitat contributes to the long-term health and resilience of the local ecosystem.


--- Page 32 ---
62
 63
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
45. Wildlife –Human  
Conflicts Management
The city and county partner with state and 
federal agencies to promote wildlife and land 
use management practices that minimize 
human conflicts with wildlife while conserving, 
restoring, and connecting habitat in the 
Boulder Valley. When the presence of wildlife 
conflicts with people or land use, or is a public 
health concern, the city and county will partner 
with state and federal agencies to use a range 
of humane, effective, cost-conscious and 
ecologically responsible management 
approaches. 
46. Consideration of Hazards
The city and county consider hazards that 
present a danger to life and property like flood, 
drought, wildfire, steep slopes, erosion, 
unstable soil, subsidence or similar geological 
constraints when analyzing proposals for 
development. The city carefully regulates 
urban development and redevelopment in 
these areas to mitigate risks and avoid hazards 
to the extent reasonably practicable. 
47. Floodplain Management
The city and county protect people and 
property from flood hazards through the 
implementation of high priority flood 
mitigation projects that also consider equity, 
ecosystem function and climate change. These 
actions will be supported by outreach and 
education initiatives to enhance community 
preparedness. To the extent feasible, 
floodways will be preserved or restored to 
maintain natural floodplain functions, major 
drainageways will be adequately maintained 
and infrastructure located within floodplains 
will be designed, upgraded or managed to 
improve resilience to current and future 
climate conditions. 
48. Air Quality Protection
The city and county seek to reduce emissions 
and improve both indoor and outdoor air 
quality to protect public health, enhance 
community well-being, and support climate 
goals. Strategies should pursue local and 
regional solutions to address everyday 
pollutants as well as acute risks such as 
wildfire smoke.
49. Fossil Fuel Consumption and 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
The city and county innovate and act to reduce 
fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas 
emissions to improve public health, strengthen 
community resilience and meet climate goals. 
The city will advance renewable energy 
generation and efficiency, sustainable 
transportation, sustainable land management 
and land planning practices that lower carbon 
emissions while supporting equity and 
economic vitality. 
50. Electrification Transition
The city and county prioritize a transition to 
renewable energy and electrification, reducing 
reliance on fossil fuels and supporting a 
resilient, low-carbon future in pursuit of 
achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emissions 
by 2035. Policies and programs encourage 
electrification of buildings, transportation and 
infrastructure while advancing energy 
efficiency and equitable, affordable access to 
clean energy for all community members. 
51. Energy Resilience during 
Emergencies
The city and county pursue energy resilience 
so that critical services and emergency 
infrastructure can operate during power 
outages. The city supports development of 
resilience hubs and evacuation sites capable of 
delivering power, essential services and 
supporting community members during 
outages and other emergencies. 
52. Energy and Resource-Efficient 
Building Design
The city and county will pursue efforts to 
improve the energy- and resource-efficiency of 
new and existing buildings and encourage 
on-site renewable energy generation. Energy 
conservation regulation and programs will 
balance the community’s goals for energy 
efficiency with the challenges of affordability. 
53. Local Energy Generation
The city and county support programs and 
opportunities for individuals, businesses and 
organizations to develop, use and share local 
energy generation. 
54. Waste Minimization and the 
Circular Economy
The city and county pursue programs, 
partnerships and activities that reduce the 
local consumption of products and materials, 
decrease food-related waste, encourage local 
reuse, reduce the amount of waste that must 
be landfilled, manage hazardous waste and 
support a circular economy that is resilient  
and regenerative. 
55. Support for Redevelopment
The city encourages redevelopment activity 
that advances community goals for housing, 
economic vitality, historic preservation, social 
connection, environmental sustainability and 
equitable access to services.  The city may use 
a variety of tools and strategies, at its 
discretion, including the creation of public/
private partnerships and district  
financing tools. 
Solar energy helps improve energy and resource efficiency.
The recycling center helps minimize waste in Boulder.


--- Page 33 ---
64
 65
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
56. Local Business and  
Affordable Space
The city supports and collaborates with 
partners to promote small, local and 
independent businesses and non-profits that 
serve the community by facilitating equity and 
access to affordable commercial space and 
resources that contribute to long-term stability 
for businesses and community services. 
57. Economic Resilience
The city monitors economic conditions and 
identifies emerging risks and potential 
challenges to prepare for potential disruptions 
to the economy. The city maintains fiscally 
responsible financial practices including 
conservative accounting policies and identifies 
new strategies that reduce the community’s 
vulnerability to financial disruptions, 
household financial challenges and 
unexpected economic downturns. 
58. Vital and Productive Retail Base
The city encourages a healthy and diverse 
retail environment that meets the daily needs 
of community members and visitors, broadly 
contributes to overall economic activity and 
supports the city’s fiscal sustainability.  The 
city will identify opportunities to improve and 
sustain retail health across the city. 
59. Business and Employment 
Diversity and Resilience
The city fosters a healthy, inclusive and 
resilient economy that includes a broad mix of 
businesses and employment opportunities 
through collaborative strategies and programs 
that build on economic strengths and 
emerging opportunities. The city will consider 
the needs of local entrepreneurs, businesses, 
workers and community members when 
planning for land use, arts, transportation, 
programs and services. 
60. Primary and Emerging  
Industry Support
The city supports an industry cluster approach 
that provides specialized programs and tools 
to encourage the formation, expansion, 
attraction and retention of businesses in 
primary and emerging industries to support 
innovation, efficiency, workforce development 
and economic opportunities and growth.
61. Visitor Economy
The city supports a visitor economy that 
contributes to Boulder’s vitality while ensuring 
that benefits flow back to the community. The 
city will balance the positive impacts of 
tourism with potential challenges, emphasizing 
local business support, equitable workforce 
and small business opportunities, natural and 
cultural resource protection and long-term 
economic resilience. 
62. Night Economy
The city supports a vibrant night-time economy 
that expands access to jobs, transportation, 
services, and amenities beyond traditional 
business hours. A safe, inclusive and well-
connected night-time environment will support 
climate resilience during extreme heat. A 
thriving night economy will strengthen 
opportunities for workers, create safe activity 
during more hours of the day, foster creativity 
and tourism and reinforce the city’s identity as 
a dynamic and welcoming place. 
63. Experiential Economy
The city supports a thriving experiential 
economy that enhances cultural life, 
strengthens local business, and contributes to 
a resilient community. Arts, culture, heritage, 
dining, entertainment, agritourism and local 
food, sports, recreation, events and historic 
places attract visitors, create jobs and enliven 
neighborhoods. The city will support efforts to 
expand opportunities, reduce barriers for 
experiential businesses and reinforce the role 
of in-person experiences in economic diversity 
and cultural identity.
64. Funding City Services and 
Infrastructure
The city promotes sustainable, diverse and 
flexible sources of revenue to create reliable 
funding for continued investment in city 
services, infrastructure and maintenance to 
maintain high quality of life for the community. 
The city will explore and utilize as appropriate 
the variety of mechanisms enabled through 
state legislation, such as improvement 
districts, metropolitan districts, tax increment 
financing and urban renewal to support 
redevelopment and investments in 
infrastructure, programs and services. 
65. City Resources Management
The city responsibly manages limited financial 
and staffing resources while balancing 
responsibilities for infrastructure investments, 
enhancements, maintenance, and project and 
program delivery. The city collaborates across 
internal departments to prioritize and 
sequence investments and programs 
appropriately. Sustainability, equity and 
resilience are prioritized in decision making. 
Events like the Bolder Boulder offer experiences for both locals and visitors and contribute to the local economy. 
Local businesses offer opportunities for social gathering.


--- Page 34 ---
66
 67
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
66. Community Health and Wellness
The city and the county support the physical, 
mental and behavioral wellness of community 
members through collaborating with 
organizations that provide health and wellness 
services and providing direct services where 
appropriate. The city and the county recognize 
the importance of providing these services to 
community members that face greater barriers 
to health services, and after significant events 
or periods of disruption. 
67. Arts, Culture and Heritage
The city supports a diverse range of affordable 
and accessible arts and cultural experiences 
by supporting investment in art in public 
places, venues, facilities, special events and 
programs that reflect Boulder’s creative spirit, 
heritage and community diversity. Arts and 
cultural programs will reflect the cultural and 
linguistic diversity of Boulder’s  
community members. 
68. Social Infrastructure 
The city supports and encourages spaces, 
programs and institutions throughout the city 
that offer social places for interpersonal 
connections, belonging, well-being and 
community cohesion for people of all cultures, 
generations, incomes, backgrounds and 
abilities. The city recognizes the value of social 
infrastructure to build community resilience 
and wellness. 
69. Communications Infrastructure
The city supports and facilitates the 
development of convenient, affordable and 
secure communications and data 
infrastructure and other improvements that 
serve the community, help businesses thrive 
and grow, foster the growth of emerging 
communications and data industries and 
support emergency systems. The city will 
collaborate with providers and community 
partners to expand access, reduce digital 
divides and ensure that infrastructure is 
adaptable to future innovations.
70. Commercial Activity in Residential 
Areas
The city will support small-scale commercial 
activity in residential areas to help community 
members access everyday needs and 
contribute to the goal of 15-minute 
neighborhoods. Spaces may include small-
scale standalone commercial uses at key 
locations, home-based businesses, accessory 
commercial units or live-work forms that offer 
affordable options for local businesses, 
cottage industries and creatives. The city will 
support equitable pathways for both property 
owners and tenants to participate in and 
benefit from these opportunities. 
71. Worker Opportunity and 
Development
The city works with employers, educators and 
partners to support equitable access to 
programs designed to help develop, up-skill 
and attract workers of all ages in multiple 
fields with a range of skills, education and 
experience. The city fosters a diverse and 
creative workforce and supports wraparound 
services for Boulder workers, ensuring 
programs are accessible to all  
community members. 
Friends gather for fun in Harlow Platts Park. Photo submitted by community member through Voicing Boulder.
Moe Gram collaborates with Creature Comforts Cafe to create a 
mural for the Street Wise Arts 2023 Mural Festival, photo by  
Tyler Dittlo.


--- Page 35 ---
68
 69
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
72. Joyful and Community-Centered 
Transportation System
The city and county design a transportation 
system that prioritizes an enjoyable, safe, fun 
and community-centered experience for 
members of the traveling public of all ages, 
abilities and backgrounds. It will focus on 
elevating the Boulder Valley as a pleasant, 
affordable and convenient place to move 
around by all modes of transportation to 
ensure our community remains connected 
physically, socially and economically. 
73. Multimodal  
Transportation Strategy
The city and county provide varied, reliable 
transportation choices to create an equitable, 
integrated and complete multimodal system 
that enables people who do not drive to fully 
participate in community life and access daily 
needs. The innovative planning, design, 
operation and maintenance of Boulder’s 
transportation system focuses on improving 
walking, rolling, bicycling, scooting, taking 
transit, riding micromobility and driving with a 
focus on moving people. The city and county 
collaborate to provide seamless connections 
between local and regional transportation 
facilities, programs and services, including 
trails, transit and Transportation Demand 
Management programs. 
78. Curbside Management  
and Parking
The city manages curbside space and parking, 
where appropriate, as a shared and limited 
public resource to support safe, equitable 
access for a wide range of users and essential 
curbside needs. Approaches will be tailored to 
the unique context of each area and designed 
to support and encourage a complete 
multimodal system. 
79. Municipal Airport
The city maintains the Boulder Municipal 
Airport as a safe environment for aviation 
business and business-related travel, scientific 
and research flights, recreation and tourism, 
flight training and vocational education, aerial 
fire-fighting, emergency medical flights, and 
disaster-related support for the city and 
county. The city will help manage and mitigate 
noise and other impacts of airport operations 
via land use controls and partnership with the 
State and fuel providers to offer unleaded fuel. 
The city is also forward-looking as aircraft 
electrification becomes reality. The city will 
continue to build relationships that allow the 
airport to be a valuable resource for a wider 
range of people in the Boulder community. The 
city will coordinate with the county to provide 
consistent regulations addressing noise and 
other airport influences, where possible. 
74. Transportation Safety  
and Vision Zero
The city and county prioritize safety when 
investing in the transportation system and 
pursuing Vision Zero. Vision Zero aims to 
reduce the number of traffic-related fatalities 
and serious injuries to zero. The city uses a 
holistic, data-driven approach to identify 
safety risks and proactively implement 
improvements to reduce risk and improve 
crash outcomes. Safety is prioritized in 
investments, project design, project delivery 
and programs, such as Safe Routes to School. 
75. Innovative Transportation for All
The city and county will ensure that its 
transportation system is innovative and when 
new technologies are introduced, they 
positively align with community values. This 
includes adjusting policies, expanding 
investments, adapting to new technologies and 
adopting innovative approaches while ensuring 
progress supports safety and equity.
76. Movement of Goods
The city and county promote the safe and 
reliable movement of goods, packages and 
freight to support the needs of local 
businesses and community members while 
supporting electrification and other 
innovations to address the environmental 
impact of goods movement activity. 
77. Resilient Infrastructure
The city designs, builds and maintains 
infrastructure that withstands and recovers 
from disasters and disruptions, such as 
extreme weather events or socioeconomic 
challenges. Infrastructure is built to contribute 
to long-term sustainability goals while 
incorporating measures to enhance resilience 
to shocks and stresses. 
Considering the many ways that Boulderites move is a critical 
component of the multimodal transportation strategy.
Community members and visitors have many choices for how to move around the Boulder Valley.


--- Page 36 ---
70
 71
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
80. Housing and Supportive Services
The city and county encourage the 
development and preservation of stable, 
accessible and affordable housing throughout 
the community as well as place-based services 
to address the unique needs of people with 
disabilities or health conditions, older adults 
and any anyone who requires additional 
housing support.
81. Housing and Supports for People 
Experiencing Homelessness
The city and county collaborate to support and 
resource the transition of people experiencing 
homelessness into safe homes and to help 
them maintain their housing through the 
provision of comprehensive supportive 
services, behavioral health assistance, 
community building and social integration. 
Housing solutions respect the dignity, 
autonomy and diversity of people  
experiencing homelessness. 
82. Housing Diversity and Supply
The city supports increasing the housing 
supply by promoting a full spectrum of 
housing types and price points, including 
middle housing and middle income 
opportunities, throughout the city that enable 
people to remain in and join the community as 
their needs, incomes and household 
compositions change over time. 
83. Manufactured Housing 
The city and county support the protection and 
rehabilitation of existing manufactured home 
communities and support increasing 
opportunities for resident ownership. 
84. Permanently Affordable  
Housing Goal
The city commits to a goal of ensuring 15% of 
all homes will be deed-restricted, permanently 
affordable for low-, moderate-, and middle-
income households by 2035. City resources 
will be directed toward maintaining existing 
permanent affordable housing units and 
increasing the stock of rental and 
homeownership affordable housing dispersed 
throughout the community. The city is 
committed to expanding permanently 
affordable housing for households below 50% 
AMI while also increasing housing options for 
middle-income households. The county 
supports and partners with the city to achieve 
regional affordable housing goals. 
85. Age Inclusive Community
The city and county support an age-inclusive 
community that is responsive to population 
trends toward an aging population and 
recognizes the importance of attracting and 
retaining young professionals and households 
with children An age-inclusive community has 
appropriate infrastructure, services, housing, 
education, accessible childcare, social 
infrastructure, entertainment and programs 
that benefit all members from children to  
older adults. 
86. Value of Industrial Land
The city values its existing industrial areas and 
will preserve them as places for innovation, 
services, creativity and employment. The city 
will use the future land use strategy to guide 
where existing industrial areas are to be 
maintained. Areas identified for a mix of 
residential and industrial uses are encouraged 
to accommodate residential infill and 
redevelopment while still supporting 
innovation, creative and manufacturing 
activities. 
87. Community Safety
The city manages risk and employs 
progressive and holistic, community-based 
problem solving and crime prevention 
strategies that address the root cause of harm 
to support a safe community, safe schools, 
safe public spaces and safe participation in 
active public life. 
Community members of all ages participate in local planning.
Supporting a range of housing types is one way to address affordability and social resilience in Boulder. 
Industrial areas contribute to the local economy and workforce. 


--- Page 37 ---
72
 73
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
88. Disasters and Public Health Risks
The city and county collaborate with local, 
regional and state partners to avoid, mitigate, 
prepare for, respond to and recover from 
natural and human-made disasters and public 
and environmental health risks. The city and 
county support community education, pre-
disaster planning and preparedness for 
disasters. Following disruptions or disaster, the 
city and county facilitate a supportive and 
efficient response and recovery. 
89. Fire Adapted Communities
The city and county are committed to creating 
and sustaining a fire adapted community 
through a coordinated, region-wide approach 
to fire and wildfire resilience and prevention 
throughout the Boulder Valley. Strategies will 
address the full spectrum of fire and wildfire 
risk, including urban conflagration, while 
enhancing public safety, promoting equitable 
protection and supporting efficient and 
effective response and recovery. 
90. Community Resources  
and Education
The city and county will work collaboratively 
with community partners who provide vital 
arts, health, language access and cultural 
services as well as education on skills, trades 
and civic navigation to community members of 
the Boulder Valley. 
91. Planning for School Sites  
and Facilities
The city and county will assist the Boulder 
Valley School District in its planning efforts to 
assure that the number, size and location of 
school lands and facilities are adequate to 
serve the population for the near future. The 
city and county will work with the school 
district to ensure safe and effective mobility 
choices are available to connect community 
members to schools.
92. Parks and Recreation Facilities  
and Programs
The city promotes the health and well-being of 
the entire Boulder community by providing 
high quality parks, facilities, programs and 
space for events. The city supports access to 
services for young people, older adults, those 
with low-income and those with disabilities. 
The city will prioritize thoughtful planning and 
management to ensure public spaces and 
services are designed to build social cohesion, 
support health and well-being and advance 
access for all.
93. Nature Everywhere
The city supports the creation, care and 
activation of accessible nature spaces 
throughout the community, affording equitable 
opportunities to live, learn and play in nature to 
all community members. 
94. Trail and Path Networks
The city and county work to provide trail and 
path systems with connectivity to the regional 
network and neighboring communities. The 
city and county coordinate with each other, 
other providers and private landowners in trail 
and path system planning, design, 
construction, management, maintenance and 
programming. Trail and path connections will 
be developed to enhance local access and 
overall function of the network. 
95. Local Food Production  
and Access
The city and county support farms, businesses, 
nonprofits, homes and programs throughout 
the region that grow, produce, process, glean 
and sell fresh local food and feed. The city and 
county recognize the importance of a local 
food system that provides nutritious and 
culturally appropriate local foods to address 
food insecurity and facilitate greater 
community access to these products. Local 
leaders and community members work 
collaboratively to sustain an agriculturally 
focused community with a food system that is 
just, equitable, inclusive, and resilient.
96. Urban Agriculture
The city supports urban agriculture, including 
greenhouses, in community and private spaces 
to combat food insecurity, extend growing 
capacity in Boulder’s climate, and promote 
equitable access to healthy, locally  
grown foods. 
97. Infrastructure for Local  
Food Systems
The city supports expanding opportunities for 
facilities that sustain and grow the local food 
system like cold storage, processing, 
greenhouses, commercial kitchens, farmers’ 
markets, community supported agriculture, 
farm stands and retail sites in appropriate  
city locations.   
Proactive land management is important to hazard resilience.
Parks provide great opportunities for recreation and connecting 
with nature. 
Agriculture and associated activities support a stronger local food system.


--- Page 38 ---
74
 75
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
98. Agricultural Water Delivery
The city and county recognize that irrigation is 
essential to sustain agricultural production 
and the ecological health of natural and 
working lands in the Boulder Valley and that a 
functional and well-maintained water delivery 
system with reliable access is the backbone of 
irrigation. The city and county support and 
encourage investment in and improvement of 
irrigation water delivery infrastructure and 
systems to minimize water losses and to 
support long-term agricultural and 
environmental health of irrigated  
working lands. 
99. Sustainable and Regenerative 
Agricultural Practices
The city and county support and promote 
sustainable and regenerative agricultural 
practices on publicly owned lands and 
encourage such practices on private lands. The 
city and county will collaborate with the 
agricultural community to employ and improve 
practices that increase economic viability and 
integrate ecological conservation, enhanced 
soil health, responsible water use, water 
quality protection, biodiversity and humane 
treatment of livestock. 
100. Agricultural Workforce Support
The city and county recognize workers are 
critical to sustaining agriculture and a local 
food system and encourage training, 
apprenticeship and skill development 
programs. The city and county support 
exploring options to increase transportation 
options, worker protections and housing 
opportunities for agriculture workers and land 
stewards in the Boulder Valley.
101. Community Engagement
The city is committed to meaningful, inclusive, 
and equitable engagement of all community 
members to lead to better decision-making 
and outcomes. The city supports elevating 
youth engagement and input in long-range 
policy making as they may be 
disproportionately affected by decisions that 
take decades to realize. The city recognizes 
there are communities that have been 
historically excluded from engagement and 
influence, and enhanced efforts and resources 
are needed to include them and create 
belonging in government decision-making. The 
city supports volunteer programs that engage 
people in activities and efforts to improve the 
Boulder Valley community and help address 
local issues. 
102. Consultation with Federally 
Recognized American Indian Tribal 
Nations
The city supports actions that encourage 
understanding and appreciation of American 
Indian Tribal Nations, their traditions, culture 
and our shared history in these ancestral lands 
known as the Boulder Valley. The city respects 
Tribal sovereignty and self-determination and 
follows federal and state consultation 
guidelines. The city follows a formal 
government-to-government consultation 
process to receive input on important topics 
with Tribal Nations. 
103. Engagement with Local 
Indigenous Peoples
The city and county acknowledge that local 
Indigenous community members and nations 
face distinct hardships and barriers rooted in 
historic and ongoing inequities. Their voices, 
knowledge, and priorities are central to 
shaping a more inclusive and just future for 
the Boulder Valley. The city and county are 
committed to strengthening and improving 
ongoing engagement with these community 
members in planning and decision- 
making processes.
104. Transparent Governance
The city and county commit to gathering and 
sharing transparent information about local 
government processes, engagement and 
decision-making. The city and county follow 
best practices in using plain language, 
providing digital accessibility, and offering 
high-quality diverse language access for all 
community members. The city and county 
support strategic decision-making informed by 
timely, reliable and accurate data and analysis, 
to the extent practicable, balanced with 
community input and feedback on  
lived experiences.
Want to learn more? 
Check out the following city websites to 
learn more about planning for... 
Housing
Expanding Affordable Housing Options
Manufactured Housing Strategy  
Action Plan
Transportation
Transportation Master Plan
Water Resources
Water Supply and Planning
Water Conservation
Vital Landscapes and Resources
Open Space and Mountain Parks
Parks and Recreation
Nature-Based Climate Solutions
You can explore these and more at the city 
department plans website: 
Department Plans
Local kids participate in community engagement.


--- Page 39 ---
76
 77
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Future Land Use
The comprehensive plan Future Land Use Map provides a vision for how land across the 
Boulder Valley is intended to evolve over time. The map provides a flexible, adaptable 
framework that will shape new and updated regulations, inform rezoning and development 
decisions, guide infrastructure planning and inform investment for public projects. The 
Future Land Use Map works to implement the comprehensive plan by equitably applying 
policies to neighborhoods across the city. This approach is intended to manage change 
across the Boulder Valley to achieve community’s vision, align with community values, 
respond to the challenges of our time and adapt to the changing future.   
4
Artwork by Cal Brackin.


--- Page 40 ---
78
 79
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Future Land Use Strategy 
Objectives of the Future  
Land Use Strategy
Support Infill Development and 
Redevelopment: Encourage growth within 
already developed areas to make efficient use 
of land, services and infrastructure while 
protecting natural features. 
Promote Mixed-Use, Transit-Rich Areas: 
Foster walkable, pedestrian-friendly 
neighborhoods with a mix of residential, 
commercial and civic uses supported by high 
quality public and shared transit. 
Expand Housing Options: Increase the 
diversity and supply of housing types to create 
more housing choices for households of 
different sizes, abilities and income levels. 
Enhance Public Spaces and Connectivity: 
Provide accessible parks, trails, recreation 
areas and gathering places that connect 
neighborhoods, offer social opportunity and 
support healthy lifestyles. 
Balance Growth with Environmental 
Protection: Integrate natural features and 
infrastructure into development and protect 
and enhance intact habitats to maintain a 
healthy, biodiverse ecosystem within and 
surrounding the urban environment.  
Ensure Flexibility and Adaptability: Be 
flexible and able to respond to changing 
community needs and future uncertainties. 
Implementation of the future land use strategy 
will involve ongoing collaboration between city 
departments, the county, stakeholders and 
community members. Creating more detailed 
subcommunity and area plans, monitoring 
development patterns, refining strategies, and 
making intentional code updates will further 
implement the future land use strategy to 
support equitable, resilient and  
sustainable growth.
Understanding Future Land Use and Zoning
Land use and zoning work together to manage how Boulder has evolved over time.
Future land use and zoning both help achieve 
the community’s goals and lead to more 
predictable development outcomes. While they 
work together, they are distinct tools and can 
easily be confused.
Future land use is broad policy that sets the 
vision for how land across the Boulder Valley is 
intended to be used and developed over time. 
Future land use also establishes the policy 
foundation that guides changes to zoning 
regulations and where different zone districts 
should be applied.
Zoning is the regulatory tool that sets detailed 
rules and standards for specific properties like 
building heights, densities and permitted 
activities. Zoning conveys a property right.
A change of future land use on a property does 
not change the zoning. Land use only 
establishes a long-term vision. Additional 
public processes to change the zoning map or 
zoning district regulations will implement this 
long-term vision by modifying the rules that 
govern use and development of  
individual properties.
Community members workshop land use concepts. 
University of Colorado students use objects to build an ideal 
neighbhorhood.


--- Page 41 ---
80
 81
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Regional Hub
Regional Hub
Community Hub
Community Hub
Neighborhood 2
Neighborhood 2
Neighborhood 1
Neighborhood 1
Mixed use at a variety of 
heights. Typically the 
highest intensity in the city.
Mixed use at a variety of 
heights. Similar or higher 
intensity than Neighborhood 2.
Larger scale of 3 stories or 
more. Attached and multi-unit 
homes with supporting 
commercial.
Smaller scale of 3 stories or less. 
Single-unit detached, attached and 
some multi-unit homes with 
supporting commercial.
Commercial
Residential
Design of the Built Environment 
The city of Boulder’s urban form is the physical expression of how land use, mobility and public 
spaces work together to create a livable, resilient community. The goal is to maintain a compact 
city that reinforces the distinct identity of different neighborhoods, hubs and natural areas in 
Boulder. This urban form is supported by preserving the surrounding rural and open space 
qualities in the county.
Compact and Connected 
Direct growth to Area 1-Urban Lands and 
encourage redevelopment and infill alongside 
potential expansion to maintain a compact 
community surrounded by  
rural lands.
Organize land uses into a coherent structure of 
neighborhoods, hubs, systems and special 
purpose areas that are linked by a multimodal 
transportation network.
Plan for daily needs that are accessible within 
15 minutes by walking for pedestrians of all 
abilities, reducing trip distances and 
community reliance on single-occupancy 
vehicles and increasing social cohesion  
and resiliency.
Integrate greenways, parks, biodiversity and 
natural corridors into the urban fabric to 
connect people to nature and  
manage stormwater.
Complete and Functional 
Support mixed-use hubs and corridors that 
concentrate housing, jobs and services near 
transit and mobility options.
Encourage neighborhoods that include diverse 
housing types, small-scale commercial activity 
and public spaces that foster social interaction 
and economic opportunity.
Align land use and transportation planning to 
create continuous, multimodal networks that 
improve connectivity and safety.
Human-Scaled and  
Climate-Responsive 
Promote building designs that break up large 
facades and massing, minimize physical and 
visual impacts from excessive parking and 
create engaging architectural outcomes.
Prioritize a streetscape and public realm 
experience that incorporates human-scaled 
design elements, provides active uses at the 
ground level, is designed around movement at 
walking or rolling speeds and makes 
meaningful contributions to  
community character.
Incorporate nature-based solutions, such as 
tree canopy, green infrastructure and 
permeable landscapes, to reduce heat, 
manage stormwater and enhance biodiversity.
Encourage energy-efficient and adaptable 
building design that supports long-term 
sustainability goals.
Encourage social and gathering spaces inside 
and outside buildings to promote  
interpersonal connection. 
Distinct and Inclusive 
Reinforce the unique character of Boulder’s 
neighborhoods and hubs through design that 
balances change with community identity.
Provide welcoming, accessible public spaces 
for people of all ages, abilities, cultures and 
backgrounds. Create a mix of types of public 
spaces geared towards intended users that are 
enriched with art and nature. 
Ensure that urban form decisions advance 
equity, offering affordable housing and 
commercial spaces, safe mobility and inclusive 
access to amenities.


--- Page 42 ---
82
 83
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Diagram showing how the Transition Area concept could apply to future land use designation boundaries 
between Neighborhood 1 (yellow), Neighborhood 2 (orange) and Parks (green).  
How to Use the Future Land Use Designations and Map
Interpretation
The Future Land Use Map depicts a plan of the 
desired land use pattern in the Boulder Valley.  
The map allows for a range of outcomes that 
are consistent with the community vision and 
can be resilient to future disruptions. The land 
use designation definitions accompany and 
help interpret the map. The definitions 
describe a sense of character, scale and use of 
each designation. The definitions are not 
intended to prescribe specific outcomes or set 
exact standards. They allow for a dynamic and 
evolving community that is responsive to 
societal, economic and environmental changes. 
In some areas, this character may already 
exist, whereas in others it would take 
incremental change over time to make 
progress toward the vision. Amendments to 
the map and these designations will follow the 
Amendment Procedures outlined in the 
Intergovernmental Agreement between the 
city and county.
The map and associated designations should 
be used to guide future land use and 
transportation decisions in conjunction with 
the policies in this plan. They will inform future 
zoning and/or rezoning decisions and 
development applications that require general 
consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
Subcommunity and local area planning can 
support the implementation of this map to 
more focused areas of the community. Other 
references to consider when applying 
comprehensive plan policies and the Future 
Land Use Map to decisions may include:
•	
Surrounding context, including existing and 
planned development and natural features
•	
Interfaces between higher intensity and 
lower intensity areas
•	
Proximity to transit, hubs or other services 
or amenities
•	
Opportunities to achieve community 
benefits, like affordable housing
•	
Guidance from subcommunity or area plans
The future land use designations that describe 
more urban character in the Neighborhoods, 
Hubs and Special Purpose classes are 
intended to guide change on properties under 
city jurisdiction in Area 1-Urban Lands and 
properties proposed for annexation. Land 
under county jurisdiction in Area 2-Urban Edge 
will continue to be guided by county planning 
processes, zoning and regulations even if 
these designations are applied in the Future 
Land Use Map.   
Building Connections by artists Becky Wareing Steele and 
Shannon Geis was created in response to Community  
Assembly feedback.
Transition Areas between Certain Future Land Use Designations
The comprehensive plan future land use 
strategy envisions a ‘Transition Area’ of 
approximately one-half city block (150 feet), on 
either side of a future land use boundary to 
integrate complementary land use 
designations applied within Area 1-Urban 
Lands. In this Transition Area, either of the 
adjacent future land use designations may be 
considered when evaluating a proposed 
rezoning, development application, or other 
review process that requires consistency with 
the comprehensive plan. This Transition Area 
only applies to boundaries between the 
Neighborhood and Hub future land use classes 
including Neighborhood 1, Neighborhood 2, 
Community Hub, Regional Hub and Innovation 
and Production Hub designations. The 
Transition Area does not apply in Planning 
Areas other than Area 1-Urban Lands or to 
boundaries shared with any other future land 
use classes or designations.
The edge of each future land use designation 
generally follows logical regulatory, physical 
and natural boundaries found in urban 
locations like property lines, streets or creek 
corridors. In some cases, a clear and distinct 
boundary is important to maintain, like a 
boundary between Industrial and 
Neighborhood 1 future land uses. In other 
situations, it may be important for two future 
land uses to blend more seamlessly, like 
between Neighborhood 2 and Community Hub.


--- Page 43 ---
84
 85
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Hubs
Community
Regional
Innovation and 
Production
Systems
Parks
Greenways
Open Space
Special 
Purposes
Industrial
Facilities
University
Future Land Use Classes and Designations
The Future Land Use Map includes 12 future land use designations organized into five classes. 
This section identifies goals for each class of future land use and definitions for each designation.
Neighborhoods
Neighborhood 1
Neighborhood 2
Rural Lands
Rural


--- Page 44 ---
86
 87
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Neighborhoods Class
Neighborhoods are primarily urban residential areas and are a building block of the city of 
Boulder’s character and housing choice.  
Land Use Goals 
•	
Create more housing opportunities 
•	
Enable diverse housing options  
•	
Provide community amenities and 
gathering spaces 
•	
Encourage access to small-scale 
neighborhood-serving goods and services  
Environmental Goals 
•	
Enhance the landscape to support 
biodiversity and increase access to nature 
•	
Maintain and expand the urban tree canopy 
and other nature-based climate solutions 
•	
Improve community resilience to hazards 
•	
Support lower carbon-intensive homes  
and lifestyles  
Mobility Goals 
•	
Improve walkability to neighborhood 
amenities, needs and services 
•	
Enhance the network of low-speed streets 
for safe and convenient bicycling, walking, 
or rolling 
•	
Connect neighborhoods to fast, frequent, 
and reliable transit  
Neighborhood 2
Neighborhood 1
Examples of the variety of housing types you might find in the Neighborhoods Class. 
Economic Goals
•	
Support small scale, neighborhood- 
serving businesses  
•	
Provide opportunities for homebased work, 
local entrepreneurship and maker- 
oriented uses  
Equity Goals  
•	
Increase access to housing choices  
•	
Increase access to economic opportunities 
•	
Improve accessibility for travelers of  
all abilities 
•	
Encourage community gathering and 
enhanced social connection 
•	
Increase mobility options and reduce 
household transportation costs


--- Page 45 ---
88
 89
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Neighborhood 1 areas are primarily residential, featuring detached single-unit homes and small-
scale, attached unit housing types. Neighborhood 1 also includes opportunities for small-scale 
businesses and other community uses serving local community members, such as dining, 
services, schools and places of worship. 
Why it matters
Neighborhood 1 encourages a variety of housing choices that are complementary to the primarily 
small and medium-scale residential character of existing areas. These areas support citywide 
goals by offering housing options, many of which include private yards, with access to parks, 
schools, and neighborhood services. Their primarily residential character, complemented by 
small-scale businesses and public uses, helps maintain walkability and a strong sense of 
community across the city. 
What you can expect 
Neighborhood 1
Urban Design 
•	
Residential and commercial buildings in 
these neighborhoods are typically 
moderate in scale, maintaining a residential 
form and rhythm along a block, generally 
one to three stories with massing and 
setbacks that are harmonious with the 
surrounding neighborhood. 
•	
Street-level frontages are designed to 
engage the public realm, with clearly 
defined front doors, porches, stoops and 
windows that create a sense of connection 
between homes and the street. Commercial 
spaces are encouraged at intersections of 
streets and may incorporate shopfronts 
with doors and windows facing the 
sidewalk and smaller setbacks to enhance 
street-level activity. 
•	
Individual private green spaces, such as 
yards and gardens, provide residential 
opportunities to connect to nature, while 
shared outdoor spaces foster social 
interaction, nature experiences, play and a 
sense of connection to local neighborhoods. 
Outdoor spaces use water efficiently.  
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in Neighborhood 1 is calm and 
connected, with low-speed streets and 
sidewalks that make walking and rolling 
safe and convenient. 
•	
Paths and street trees create pleasant 
routes to nearby parks, schools and small 
businesses, encouraging short trips without 
a car. 
•	
Curbside space is typically used for parking 
and deliveries and may be managed 
depending on demand, with occasional 
bicycle facilities, multi-use paths or 
micromobility parking integrated into the 
neighborhood fabric. 
Uses
Primary
Residential
Detached Unit; Attached Unit; Group Living
Supporting
Residential
Multi-Unit
Commercial
Retail; Personal Services; Office; Food & Beverage;  
Maker, Artisan & Innovation
Civic
Government; Health Care & Institutional; Educational;  
Places of Worship
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation; Urban Agriculture


--- Page 46 ---
90
 91
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Neighborhood 2 areas are primarily residential neighborhoods that feature a mix of denser 
housing types and larger buildings. Thoughtfully integrated commercial and other non-residential 
uses are generally concentrated near transit services. 
Why it matters
Neighborhood 2 provides opportunities for more people to live close to jobs, schools, parks, 
shops and mobility options. The additional density in these neighborhoods supports vibrant 
businesses and community spaces, supports the development of a robust transit network and 
fosters walkable urban neighborhoods. 
What you can expect 
Primary
Residential
Attached Unit; Multi-Unit; Group Living
Supporting
Residential
Detached Unit
Commercial
Retail; Personal Services; Office; Food and Beverage; Lodging; 
Vehicle Related; Maker, Artisan and Innovation
Civic
Government Healthcare and Institutional; Education; 
Places of Worship
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation; Urban Agriculture
Neighborhood 2
Urban Design 
•	
Residential and mixed-use buildings are 
generally medium or high in intensity  
and scale.  
•	
Building forms accommodate up to 5 
stories and create a high-quality urban 
street frontage. 
•	
Overall site design emphasizes efficient 
land use while maintaining a comfortable, 
pedestrian scale through thoughtful 
building design, gathering spaces, natural 
infrastructure and streetscape amenities. 
•	
Structures may occupy larger portions of 
their lots, with limited setbacks, and shared 
open spaces such as courtyards, 
playgrounds, plazas or green spaces. 
Mobility 
•	
Neighborhood 2 offers a more urban 
mobility experience, where sidewalks, 
bicycle facilities, and transit-supportive 
infrastructure are integral to the  
street network. 
•	
These neighborhoods prioritize safe 
multimodal access to homes, jobs and other 
local destinations, making it easy to 
connect without relying on a car. 
•	
Curbsides may be actively managed, 
balancing parking with space for transit, 
bicycle facilities, micromobility, and 
deliveries to support the higher density and 
mix of uses.  
•	
If off-street parking is provided, unbundled, 
structured, underground and shared  
is preferred. 
Uses


--- Page 47 ---
92
 93
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Hubs Class
Hubs are mixed-use urban centers that range in scale and expectations for activity. Hubs can be 
organized around nodes or along corridors. They act as anchors for surrounding areas and bring 
together housing, commerce, services, public spaces and mobility choices.  
Land Use Goals 
•	
Expand housing choices through infill and 
redevelopment 
•	
Encourage a variety of economic activity  
•	
Enhance arts, cultural and civic life 
•	
Connect community members and visitors 
with Boulder businesses 
Environmental Goals 
•	
Expand resource-efficient building types 
•	
Enhance and expand urban canopy and 
natural infrastructure into urban locations 
•	
Demonstrate opportunities for localized 
circular economies 
Mobility Goals 
•	
Provide safe, multimodal connections for 
all ages and abilities that prioritize transit, 
pedestrian, bicycle, and micromobility 
access
•	
Create walkable pedestrian-oriented 
streets 
•	
Incorporate fast, frequent, and reliable 
transit and provide connections to regional 
transit networks 
•	
Manage curbside demand to balance 
access and multiple activities 
Community
Regional
Innovation and 
Production
Existing hubs throughout the community include a mix of uses and activities.
Economic Goals 
•	
Strengthen local economic vitality  
•	
Support health of the retail market by 
expanding opportunities for connections 
with customers 
•	
Support a diverse mix of businesses that 
serve residents and visitors 
•	
Encourage the creation and preservation of 
affordable commercial spaces  
•	
Foster a mix of employment opportunities 
accessible to community members of all 
incomes and backgrounds 
Equity Goals 
•	
Support diverse living and working choices  
•	
Support local businesses and 
entrepreneurs 
•	
Improve safety throughout the day and 
night 
•	
Create reliable connections between where 
people live, work, play and gather 


--- Page 48 ---
94
 95
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What you can expect 
Primary
Residential
Multi-Unit; Group Living
Commercial
Retail; Personal Services; Food and Beverage
Supporting
Residential
Attached Unit
Commercial
Office; Arts, Culture and Entertainment; Lodging; Vehicle Related; 
Maker, Artisan and Innovation
Industrial
Research and Development
Civic
Government, Health Care and Institutional; Educational;  
Places of Worship
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation; Urban Agriculture
Community Hub
What it is 
Community Hubs are vibrant, mixed-use centers that bring together homes, shops, restaurants, 
services, offices and community spaces. These places have a strong mix of multi-unit housing 
and residential mixed-use buildings with stand-alone commercial buildings and outdoor 
gathering areas. These hubs are designed for convenience and connection and are intended to 
offer places that may draw people from across the community. 
Why it matters
Community Hubs help bring people together, offer space for community destinations and support 
a strong local economy. They include places to live, work, play and gather, all within a walkable 
and lively environment. Community Hubs are at the heart of many neighborhoods and 
concentrate local business activity and dense housing in walkable distances to surrounding 
residential areas. This allows community members to live close to goods and services, find 
opportunities to connect with others and reduce reliance on cars for daily needs. 
Urban Design 
•	
Community Hubs are moderately to highly 
dense areas that can include a mix of 
building types and range of  
building heights. 
•	
Site design and building orientation create 
active street frontages and pedestrian-
friendly building facades. Public realm 
along frontages accommodates spillover 
space for commercial and  
community activity.  
•	
Public gathering spaces within the hub 
encourage social interaction, play and 
activity throughout the day and evening. 
•	
Designs strive to incorporate robust urban 
canopy and other natural infrastructure to 
offset the urban environment.  
Mobility 
•	
Community Hubs are dynamic, serving daily 
needs and gatherings. They are designed 
for convenience and safe, comfortable, and 
direct connections to and through the area.  
•	
Streets provide greater protection for 
walking, bicycling, and micromobility, with 
frequent transit access that links to 
surrounding neighborhoods and  
regional routes. 
•	
Community hubs include more robust 
walking and bicycling infrastructure, such 
as protected bicycle lanes with horizontal 
or vertical separation and protected 
intersection designs. 
•	
The curbside supports loading zones, 
micromobility, bicycle facilities, short-term 
parking, and social uses that are connected 
to the public realm. 
Uses


--- Page 49 ---
96
 97
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Regional Hubs are major destinations for community members and visitors to the Boulder Valley. 
They are busy, high-energy places where people come to work, visit, shop, dine and live. Regional 
Hubs enjoy activity throughout the day and night. They include a mix of stores, restaurants, 
entertainment venues, cultural attractions, offices and housing. 
Why it matters
Regional Hubs are defining places of Boulder’s identity and play a key role in the health of the 
local economy. They bring together jobs, retail, services, tourism and housing in artful, walkable, 
well-connected areas. These places are regional destinations for visitors and community 
members alike and celebrate Boulder’s history, sense of place and future. 
What you can expect 
Regional Hub
Urban Design 
•	
Regional Hubs are high-density, mixed-use 
areas that accommodate taller buildings 
and a wide variety of uses integrated either 
vertically or horizontally across sites. 
•	
Site design emphasizes high-quality shared 
public spaces for gathering, movement  
and play. 
•	
Building orientation and ground floor 
design creates active street frontages. 
Facades provide visual interest and ground-
floor transparency for pedestrians. As a 
regional draw for community members and 
visitors alike, excellent design quality of 
both architecture and the public realm  
is expected. 
Uses
Primary
Residential
Multi-Unit
Commercial
Retail; Personal Services; Office; Food and Beverage; 
Lodging; Arts, Culture and Entertainment
Supporting
Residential
Detached Unit; Attached Unit; Group Living
Commercial
Vehicle Related; Maker, Artisan and Innovation
Civic
Government, Healthcare and Institutional; Educational;  
Places of Worship
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation; Urban Agriculture
Mobility 
•	
Regional Hubs are major destinations 
where people move around using abundant 
mobility options. 
•	
Wide sidewalks, bicycle infrastructure, and 
transit connections make it easy to move 
between home, work, shopping, dining  
and entertainment. 
•	
Goods movement is integrated into the 
street network to support the mix of uses in 
this area. 
•	
Curbside space is highly active and 
managed, prioritizing transit, bicycle 
facilities, micromobility, loading, and social 
uses at a greater intensity than other areas. 
•	
Structured, unbundled, underground, and 
shared vehicle parking is encouraged. 


--- Page 50 ---
98
 99
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Innovation and Production Hubs are primarily working neighborhoods that carefully integrate 
housing choices and local amenities. These areas support a wide range of industries and provide 
opportunities for businesses to start and grow. Industrial in nature, these places accommodate 
businesses that might be considered noisy or messy. They also offer dynamic living options that 
are well-connected and close to jobs and recreational options. 
Why it matters
Innovation and Production Hubs offer essential space for Boulder’s innovative economy and 
entrepreneurial future by integrating diverse housing types, commercial activity, and industrial 
spaces. These vibrant, walkable, working neighborhoods offer employers, employees and local 
community members a variety of local services and amenities. They support long-standing and 
emerging industries and creatives and create harmony between working, living, playing  
and making. 
What you can expect 
Innovation and Production Hub
Uses
Primary
Residential
Attached Unit; Multi-Unit; Group Living 
Commercial
Office; Maker, Artisan and Innovation 
Industrial
Research and Development; Light Industrial
Supporting
Commercial
Retail; Personal Service; Food and Beverage; Vehicle Related;  
Arts, Culture and Entertainment
Civic
Educational
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation; Urban Agriculture
Urban Design 
•	
Innovation and Production Hubs feature a 
diverse mix of building types and sizes, 
including live/work spaces. 
•	
Buildings vary widely in height and form, 
ranging from smaller workshop-style 
structures to larger multi-story facilities 
that support flexible work environments 
and housing. 
•	
Site design emphasizes functional layouts 
with adaptable spaces, active street edges 
and shared amenities that foster 
collaboration and innovation. Site uses may 
be mixed vertically or horizontally.  
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in Innovation and Production Hubs 
support walking, bicycling, micromobility, 
and transit while maintaining safe 
circulation for freight, service and  
delivery vehicles. 
•	
Curbside areas are designed for flexibility, 
with loading zones integrated alongside 
bicycle facilities, micromobility parking and 
pedestrian access, ensuring industrial 
activity coexists with housing and  
creative spaces.  
•	
Off-street and shared parking  
is encouraged. 


--- Page 51 ---
100
 101
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Systems Class
The Boulder Valley systems make up the framework of critical habitat, recreation areas, 
agricultural activities and natural infrastructure that the community relies on for healthy, safe 
and sustainable living. These systems work together to support our community’s ecosystem 
services, climate resilience, cultural identity and unique built form, and provide the network 
where the urban and rural environments interconnect.  
Land Use Goals 
•	
Maintain the urban and rural characteristics 
that define the Boulder Valley 
•	
Enhance opportunities for connection  
with nature 
•	
Support spaces for social activity, 
recreation and play 
•	
Maintain a healthy agricultural community 
Environmental Goals 
•	
Maintain and enhance natural areas that 
increase biodiversity, protect water 
resources, sequester carbon and perform 
other ecosystem services 
•	
Improve climate adaptation and resilience 
by thinking of systems holistically across 
the Boulder Valley 
•	
Recognize the critical link between urban 
and natural systems 
Mobility Goals 
•	
Provide safe, multimodal connections for 
all ages and abilities that prioritize transit, 
pedestrian, bicycle and  
micromobility access 
•	
Maintain safe, low-intensity road networks 
that support rural travel needs, focusing 
significant commuter travel onto primary 
multimodal corridors and minimizing 
impacts on the surrounding landscape 
Parks
Greenways
Open Space
Economic Goals  
•	
Reduce economic losses related to climate 
change and environmental hazards through 
resilient system design 
•	
Support the local economy by maintaining 
and enhancing systems, parks, greenways, 
open space, agriculture, and  
rural landscapes 
•	
Enhance the attractiveness of Boulder’s 
neighborhoods and employment centers by 
investing in natural and  
recreational systems  
•	
Sustain local agricultural enterprises by 
preserving working landscapes and 
supporting local and regional food systems 
Equity Goals  
•	
Ensure community spaces and services are 
dispersed throughout the Boulder Valley 
•	
Focus resources on underserved areas 
•	
Ensure access to nature, places to cool off 
and recreation are dispersed throughout 
the Boulder Valley 
Examples of Parks, Greenways and Open Space included under Systems Class.


--- Page 52 ---
102
 103
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Parks are publicly accessible, active and passive recreational spaces such as multi-use lawns, 
gardens, playgrounds, nature play areas, water play areas, sport courts and fields, dog parks, 
historic and cultural sites and recreation centers. These areas are designed for community 
members to gather, exercise, rest, build social relationships and enjoy the outdoors. Some park 
areas may prioritize low-impact, ecologically sensitive design with the goal of  
habitat preservation.  
Why it matters
Parks directly contributed to the mental and physical health and well-being of the entire Boulder 
community. These public spaces support a healthy and socially thriving community, economic 
vitality, sustainability and resilience. Together with the urban tree canopy, greenways and other 
open natural areas, Parks are critical to the livability of the urban environment and serve as 
important places to connect to and play in nature. 
What you can expect 
Parks
Uses
Primary
Other
Active Recreation; Passive Recreation 
Supporting
Commercial
Retail;  Food and Beverage; Arts, Culture and Entertainment
Civic
Government
Other
Agriculture; Open Lands
Urban Design 
•	
Park design supports places to socially 
gather, have fun, play and contribute to 
economic vitality. Design balances the 
restoration and enhancement of local 
ecosystems and biodiversity, climate 
resilient practices and the need for 
welcoming, safe, inclusive and accessible 
spaces for all ages and abilities. 
•	
Parks are well connected to surrounding 
uses and local mobility networks. Clear 
wayfinding, visible entrances and 
thoughtfully integrated amenities 
encourage everyday use. 
•	
Design responds to Boulder’s unique 
natural setting, cultural history and 
surrounding context and reinforces 
Boulder’s identity as a community closely 
connected to its natural environment. 
Mobility 
•	
 Mobility in and around Parks prioritizes 
inclusive access and active transportation, 
including transit service. 
•	
Pathways and trails connect efficiently and 
seamlessly to surrounding neighborhoods 
and regional networks, inviting walking, 
rolling, and bicycling for recreation and 
daily trips. 
•	
Parking and transit stops are near 
entrances and amenities, providing 
accessibility and opportunities for visitors 
to move through green spaces. 


--- Page 53 ---
104
 105
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Greenways are areas adjacent to natural urban waterways within city limits, including Boulder 
Creek and tributary streams, that help manage and mitigate flooding, support multifunctional 
landscapes and ecosystem services and protect cultural resources. Greenways may also offer 
recreation and active transportation amenities. These areas form an interconnected system 
across public and private lands. 
Why it matters
Greenways are a key feature of the community’s flood mitigation strategy and provide connected 
environmental corridors in the urban area that support habitat, wildlife movement and climate 
resilience. Additionally, they offer opportunities for passive recreation and off-street mobility 
networks that enhance the community’s ability to connect with nature and each other. 
What you can expect 
Greenways
Uses
Primary
Civic
Utility Operations
Other
 Open Lands
Supporting
Other
Passive Recreation
Urban Design and Management 
•	
Greenways are associated with Boulder 
Creek and other major drainageways. These 
linear spaces serve to manage creek and 
flood waters while weaving natural systems 
into the urban fabric that also support 
mobility networks and limited  
recreation activities. 
•	
Greenways management emphasizes flood 
control, continuity and ecological integrity 
to support ecosystem services, including 
the movement of urban wildlife into and 
across the system. Built elements, such as 
paths, trails, bridges, lighting, seating, 
wayfinding and interpretive signage, are 
integrated sensitively into the landscape to 
support recreation and movement that 
works with the needs of the ecosystem and 
offers minimal disturbance. 
•	
Some Greenway segments are publicly 
accessible, whereas others occur on private 
property or within utility, drainage, or 
conservation easements that support flood 
management, ecological function, and 
landscape connectivity without full  
public access. 
Mobility 
•	
Some Greenways may provide scenic, 
continuous routes for walking, bicycling 
and rolling, offering a low-stress alternative 
to on-street movement. 
•	
Multi-use paths along some Greenways link 
neighborhoods, parks, Open Space and 
major destinations, creating a backbone for 
regional connectivity. 
•	
Access points may include curbside 
parking, bikeshare stations, and 
micromobility facilities that support 
recreational, daily and commuter travel. 


--- Page 54 ---
106
 107
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
The Open Space system consists of lands maintained for specific purposes including, but not 
limited to, preservation and restoration of natural habitat and features, agricultural stewardship, 
floodplain protection, education, cultural resource protection and passive recreation. These 
purposes are further defined by the City of Boulder Charter or county open space tax-enabling 
ballot language. Open Space lands are stewarded by the city, county, other public entities or 
non-profits either through direct ownership, conservation easements on private land or other 
contractual obligations like management or annexation agreements. Open Space properties are 
not typically intensively developed and serve to limit urban sprawl into the rural areas of the 
Boulder Valley. Privately owned sites may contain development but still contribute to the 
community’s open space values by the terms of existing agreements.  
Why it matters
The Open Space system forms the foundation for the community’s ecological health and climate 
resilience by maintaining plant and animal biodiversity, sequestering carbon, protecting water 
resources and managing wildfire risk. These lands provide a backbone for local agriculture and 
associated activities and support the Boulder Valley’s philosophy of compact urban development 
surrounded by rural and natural lands. Open Space creates a highly valued connection to nature 
and rural land, provides passive recreational opportunities, helps to ensure agricultural viability 
and contributes to the mental and physical well-being of the residents, workers and visitors of 
the Boulder Valley. 
What you can expect 
Open Space
Uses
Primary
Other
Agriculture; Open Lands; Passive Recreation
Urban Design and Management 
•	
Open Space areas are characterized by a 
deliberate absence of typical urban 
development as the landscape itself is the 
defining feature shaped by natural 
landforms, vegetation and  
ecological processes. 
•	
Visitor infrastructure such as trails, 
trailheads, shelters, recreation facilities 
and picnic areas is used intentionally to 
provide a safe and welcoming experience 
for visitors and allow for enjoyment and 
stewardship of Open Space areas. These 
facilities provide access to and highlight 
Boulder’s scenic, natural, and cultural 
landscapes while enjoying 
responsible recreation.   
•	
Structures such as agricultural buildings, 
operational structures, historic landmarks 
and irrigation infrastructure support 
working landscapes and sustainable, 
productive agriculture that support local 
farmers and ranchers in the Boulder Valley. 
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in Open Space areas provides 
defined and strategic access for habitat 
management, recreation, agricultural 
purposes and regional connections. 
•	
Access, where allowed, is primarily through 
trailheads, formal access points or farm 
entrances that connect to designated 
walking, bicycling or agricultural paths. 
•	
If available, off-street parking may be 
managed. Curbside space may be provided 
for transit, shuttles, or managed parking to 
ensure access without compromising 
scenic, natural and cultural values. 


--- Page 55 ---
108
 109
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Special Purpose Class 
Special purpose areas represent significant community assets and/or unique opportunities for 
Boulder’s governance and economy. 
Land Use Goals 
•	
Support essential services and facilities to 
provide high quality of life for  
community members 
•	
Support education, research and 
employment that sustain Boulder’s 
economy and meet community needs 
Environmental Goals 
•	
Promote sustainable building and 
operational practices that minimize 
resource use, reduce emissions, and 
protect surrounding natural systems 
Mobility Goals 
•	
Provide non-motorized connections through 
networks to and within these areas for 
pedestrians, bicycles and other 
micromobility options 
•	
Maintain safe, low-intensity road networks 
that support special purposes while 
focusing significant commuter travel onto 
primary multimodal corridors 
•	
Incorporate fast, frequent, and reliable 
transit from local destinations and provide 
connections to regional transit networks 
Industrial
Facilities
University
Economic Goals  
•	
Support essential government, research, 
utility, educational and industrial functions 
that contribute to Boulder’s economic 
stability and resilience 
•	
Strengthen the local and regional economy 
by supporting employment centers tied to 
research, innovation, education, advanced 
manufacturing and public services 
•	
Encourage investment in infrastructure and 
facilities that enable long‑term economic 
efficiency and operational reliability
Equity Goals  
•	
Foster inclusive access to jobs, education 
and services 
•	
Ensure these areas offer the potential to 
benefit all members of the community 
•	
Manage major sources of pollution to 
ensure any one area or group in the 
community is not more affected  
than another 
Industrial uses, Facilities like the federal labs, hospitals, and University uses like Folsom Field are part of the Special Purposes Class.  


--- Page 56 ---
110
 111
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Industrial lands serve the community’s need for more intensive manufacturing, processing, 
services, commercial and other uses. 
Why it matters
Industrial areas provide essential goods, services, and employment opportunities that help 
sustain Boulder’s economy and self-sufficiency. They support local businesses, supply chains and 
trades, and contain uses that may not be appropriate in other land use categories due to space, 
noise or operational needs. Preserving Industrial areas helps ensure that Boulder can continue to 
produce, repair and distribute locally, reducing dependence on outside markets  
and transportation. 
What you can expect 
Industrial
Uses
Primary
Commercial
Vehicle Related; Maker, Artisan and Innovation 
Industrial
Research and Development; Light Industrial; Heavy Industrial; 
Warehousing and Distribution Facilities 
Supporting
Commercial
Office; Food and Beverage
Civic
Education
Urban Design 
•	
Industrial areas feature a wide range of 
building types and scales, from single-story 
facilities to multi-story structures. 
•	
Buildings are generally designed for 
functional efficiency, with large footprints, 
high ceilings and spaces for equipment, 
storage and operations.  
•	
Open areas are allocated for vehicle and 
freight circulation, loading docks and 
parking. Green space and natural 
infrastructure is integrated to provide 
landscape buffers, stormwater 
management or other outdoor uses. 
•	
Site design supports operational needs, 
worker safety and clear, organized access. 
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in Industrial areas supports freight 
needs, vehicle and truck circulation, and 
safe and efficient access for workers and 
visitors through connections to regional 
transportation routes and pedestrian, 
transit and bicycle infrastructure. 


--- Page 57 ---
112
 113
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Facilities include areas that provide essential community services and infrastructure, as well as 
some lands dedicated to scientific, environmental and technological research. This designation 
encompasses municipal operations such as water treatment facilities, energy generation or 
transmission sites and other utilities along with federal research campuses, laboratories, offices 
and support facilities. These lands often include specialized infrastructure, outdoor spaces and 
operational areas needed to support research, innovation and the delivery of essential  
community functions. 
Why it matters
Facilities play a vital role in supporting community resilience, ensuring the efficient operation of 
public services and advancing scientific discovery. Municipal and utility uses enable the delivery 
of energy, water and transportation services while research institutions contribute to global 
innovation and local economic activity. Together, they reflect Boulder’s commitment to 
sustainability, self-sufficiency and public service and strengthen the city’s ability to meet 
environmental, technological and infrastructure challenges. 
What you can expect 
Facilities
Uses
Primary
Civic
Government, Healthcare and Institutional; Utility Operations 
Supporting
Commercial
Office
Industrial
Research and Development
Urban Design 
•	
Buildings on these lands vary widely in 
scale and function, from low-rise 
laboratories and service buildings to larger 
specialized or industrial facilities. 
•	
Site design is often organized in a campus-
like pattern or functional clusters, 
balancing operational efficiency with 
environmental sensitivity. 
•	
Outdoor spaces may be used for ecological 
monitoring, stormwater management or 
natural buffering, integrating these sites 
into the surrounding landscape while 
accommodating the specialized 
infrastructure required for research  
and operations. 
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in Facilities areas supports both 
operational efficiency and visitor and 
worker access while maintaining clear 
routes for service and delivery vehicles. 
•	
Internal streets and pathways 
accommodate walking, rolling,  
and bicycling.  
•	
Safe and efficient access for workers and 
visitors to regional transportation routes 
are provided where appropriate. 
•	
Curbside areas provide flexible loading 
zones, parking for cars, bicycle facilities 
and space for shuttle or transit pick-up to 
meet diverse needs. 


--- Page 58 ---
114
 115
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
University lands are areas that will be used for public university purposes into the future. This 
includes educational buildings, research facilities, event space, student and faculty housing and 
other uses that support a high-quality university environment. 
Why it matters
The University of Colorado (CU) is a cornerstone of Boulder’s identity, economy and cultural life. It 
attracts students, faculty and researchers from around the world, fostering innovation, creativity 
and a vibrant exchange of ideas. The university is one of the city’s largest employers and a key 
driver of local business activity. Its research partnerships and community programs strengthen 
Boulder’s capacity to address local and global challenges. Beyond academics, CU enriches the 
community through arts, athletics and public events that bring people together. The city has 
limited regulatory control over CU, but maintains a close relationship to coordinate on 
development activities and support outcomes that benefit the community. 
What you can expect
Uses
University
Uses support University of Colorado activities and needs such as, but not  
limited to, educational buildings, research facilities, athletic facilities,  
event space and student and faculty housing.
Urban Design 
•	
University lands are composed of a diverse 
mix of building types and scales, ranging 
from low-rise buildings to taller facilities, 
stadiums and centers, some exceeding city 
height limits. 
•	
Buildings are arranged in a campus 
environment to create active courtyards, 
plazas and shared green spaces that 
support both formal and informal 
gatherings, outdoor learning, recreation 
and events. 
•	
The overall form emphasizes connectivity, 
visual interest and a cohesive campus 
environment while balancing dense 
development with open spaces that 
enhance the student and  
community experience. 
Mobility 
•	
Mobility in University areas prioritizes 
walking, bicycling and transit through 
extensive networks of sidewalks, bicycle 
infrastructure and transit services. 
•	
Movement feels active and social, with 
pathways connecting academic buildings, 
housing and event spaces. 
•	
Curbside uses are varied, supporting 
deliveries, micromobility parking, bicycle 
facilities and transit stops to serve the 
dynamic campus environment. 


--- Page 59 ---
Rural Class 
The Rural class includes diverse land uses and development patterns reflecting the history of the 
Boulder Valley and is comprised of the privately owned lands within unincorporated Boulder 
County. Limiting development in these areas helps preserve the valley’s distinctive landscape and 
character, supporting the vision of a compact city with a clear distinction between urban and rural 
areas of the Boulder Valley. Significant change from the development pattern existing today is 
not anticipated and would occur within the framework of county planning processes, zoning and 
regulations. Change is incremental, compatible with the rural surroundings, reflective of the 
limited availability of services and facilities and aligns with the goals and policies of the Boulder 
Valley and Boulder County Comprehensive Plans.  
Land Use Goals 
•	
Maintain rural character and function of  
the area  
•	
Prevent scattered, leapfrog, or non-
contiguous urban development  
•	
Prevent over-intensive rural development 
through Boulder County planning 
processes and regulations  
Environmental Goals 
•	
Protect and enhance ecological systems 
and resources 
•	
Promote land stewardship and soil health, 
water conservation and sustainable 
agricultural practices that support the 
long-term viability and resilience of rural 
working lands 
Rural Lands
Mobility Goals 
•	
Provide a multimodal transportation system 
that recognizes opportunities within the 
Boulder Valley generate significant 
transportation demand from outside the 
area and pass through rural areas  
•	
Direct improvements and services to high-
demand, well-connected corridors to 
expand multimodal options and use  
Economic Goals
•	
Foster and promote a diverse and 
sustainable agricultural economy that 
supports the growth of the local food 
system, local markets and landbased 
livelihoods 
•	
Support the vitality of urban and rural areas 
by maintaining the distinction between 
urban and rural economies and directing 
uses to appropriate locations 
Equity Goals  
•	
Include input from community members of 
the rural areas when city decisions impact 
rural residents   
116
The Rural Class includes uses that help support the Boulder Valley’s on-going rural and agricultural character. 
 117
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN


--- Page 60 ---
118
 119
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
What it is 
Rural Lands are the unincorporated areas of the Boulder Valley that are expected to remain in the 
county’s jurisdiction and include a variety of land uses and county zone districts. Future use of 
these areas will be guided by county planning processes, the uses permitted by county zoning 
and policies in the comprehensive plan that intend to preserve the rural character of these areas. 
 
Why it matters
This designation reinforces the role of the county in the implementation of the goals of the 
comprehensive plan. Rural Lands include rural residential neighborhoods and acreages, support 
local agriculture and associated activities, sustain ecosystems and biodiversity, and maintain the 
cultural heritage of the Boulder Valley. These lands shape urban growth to maintain the city’s 
compact development pattern and provide a sense of place for both urban and rural areas of the 
community. Rural Lands seek to prevent urban sprawl and leapfrog, non-contiguous and 
scattered development in the Boulder Valley. 
What you can expect 
Rural Lands
Design and Management 
•	
Development reflects its surroundings.  
•	
Scenic vistas and visual rural character are 
protected through appropriate building 
sizes and siting, limited lighting, minimal 
infrastructure, and context- 
sensitive design.  
•	
Land management emphasizes agriculture, 
ecological preservation, hazard mitigation 
and stewardship.  
Mobility 
•	
Road network provides vehicular access to 
meet local needs. 
•	
Mobility prioritizes safety and compatibility 
with the rural context. 
A variety of uses as allowed by county zoning at a size and intensity compatible with  
the rural context. 
Uses


--- Page 61 ---
120
 121
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Boulder Valley Future Land Use Map
Future Land Use Equity 
Assessment
An equity assessment was performed on the 
definitions for each future land use 
designation, answering the following 
questions:  
 
•	
Who benefits? 
•	
Who is burdened? 
•	
Who is missing or excluded? 
•	
What unintended consequences  
might occur? 
•	
How can equity be improved? 
Across all designations, increased housing 
diversity, mixed-use development, and mobility 
improvements offer strong equity benefits, 
particularly for lower-income residents, 
renters, shift workers, people with disabilities, 
and community members who rely on transit or 
need access to jobs and services within 
walkable areas.
Several future land use designations carry 
risks of displacement, rising rents, loss of 
small businesses, and exclusion of 
communities of color if implementation of the 
Future Land Use Map and comprehensive plan 
policies do not intentionally address 
affordability, cultural belonging and 
community representation. Key findings 
highlight the need for targeted implementation 
strategies that proactively mitigate these risks 
and ensure benefits are broadly shared.
Future Land Use Map Legend
Neighborhoods
Neighborhood 1
Neighborhood 2
Hubs
Community
Regional
Innovation & Production
Systems
Parks
Greenways
Open Space
Special Purpose
Industrial
Facilities
University
Planning Area
City of Boulder
Creeks, Streams, Ditches
Water Bodies
NORTH
NORTH
N.T.S
N.T.S
Arapahoe Rd
Arapahoe Rd
Diagonal Hwy 119
Diagonal Hwy 119
Denver Boulder Turnpike
Denver Boulder Turnpike
South Boulder Rd
South Boulder Rd
Broadway
Broadway
Iris Ave
Iris Ave
Canyon 
Canyon 
Blvd
Blvd
Foothills Pkwy
Foothills Pkwy
28th St
28th St
Baseline Rd
Baseline Rd
Rural Lands
Rural


--- Page 62 ---
122
 123
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Implementation
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan sets the long-term direction for the Boulder Valley 
through its community-driven vision. The plan represents the community’s collective 
investment of time, expertise and trust. That investment is honored through faithful and 
timely implementation. 
Turning this vision into real outcomes depends on daily decisions – how programs are 
designed, which projects move forward, how funding is spent and how policies are 
implemented. This work requires ongoing, coordinated efforts among elected and 
appointed officials, city and county staff, partner organizations and community members. 
The comprehensive plan does not prioritize one policy over another. Implementation 
requires leadership, careful evaluation, weighing of tradeoffs and intentional choices. 
CHAPTER 5   Implementation
5
Artwork by Cal Brackin.


--- Page 63 ---
124
 125
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Putting the Plan into Action
City and county departments are responsible for much of the day-to-day and long-term work 
needed to put the comprehensive plan policies and land use strategies into action. Finding clear 
ways to track, demonstrate and evaluate progress can help keep the plan responsive, relevant 
and focused on what matters most to the community.
This section is intended to help policymakers and city and county staff work through the 
implementation process from development and decision-making to tracking progress. 
Guide Development and  
Decision-making
When developing plans, projects, programs, 
initiatives, regulations or budgets, consider 
how actions align with the comprehensive 
plan. Decisions may move one specific aspect 
forward or may broadly support the aspirations 
of the plan.
Support Equitable 
Implementation
Consider who benefits, who might be 
burdened, and how actions can reduce 
disparities and build long-term trust. Use 
equity considerations to guide both process 
and outcomes.
Coordinate across Departments 
and Partners
Collaborate between departments when 
developing work plans, projects, programs and 
capital investments to ensure consistency with 
the comprehensive plan. Identify and pursue 
opportunities where efforts can advance 
multiple policy areas among  
several departments.
Track and Communicate Progress
Use data, community feedback and lived 
experience to determine whether actions are 
making progress toward the vision over time. 
Develop indicators, an evaluation approach and 
process to check-in with community members 
to monitor the effectiveness of actions.
How Implementation Works
City and county departments will work together to translate the plan into more detailed work 
programs and projects through the Citywide Strategic Plan, department plans, annual budgeting 
processes and more. These efforts can identify priority actions, assign responsibilities and 
determine timing based on available resources and community needs. They will serve as the 
primary mechanism for identifying and advancing priority implementation actions following 
adoption of the comprehensive plan.
This approach allows the city and county to remain flexible and responsive while making steady 
progress toward the long-term vision.
Regional, state and other partners also play important roles in implementation, and their work 
can help advance comprehensive plan goals. Achieving the community’s vision depends on 
continued coordination among departments, policymakers and community partners.
Implementation of the comprehensive plan over time will define:
•	
Which projects, programs and initiatives are prioritized;
•	
How projects and programs are designed, delivered and evaluated;
•	
How benefits and impacts are distributed across the community;
•	
How regulations implement the vision of the community by defining where different land 
uses are supported, the form and scale of buildings and how each site plays into the larger 
character of its neighborhood;
•	
How the community learns from experience and adjusts strategies over time.
Community members discuss plans for improvements along 30th 
Street as part of a capital improvement project.


--- Page 64 ---
126
 127
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Implementation Strategies
The city and county will implement the plan through a range of strategies that vary in scale, 
timing and complexity. The strategies identified here are not exhaustive or prescriptive. They 
illustrate potential paths to advance the plan over time. The city will consider these strategies 
and others through regular updates to the Citywide Strategic Plan, City Council priority setting, 
annual work plans and other efforts to incrementally implement the plan over time. 
1.	 Perform detailed planning 
Additional planning for specific locations or topics may be needed to provide more detailed 
guidance for future decisions where more information is needed.
2.	 Update codes and regulations 
Regulations, such as the Boulder Revised Code, may be amended for alignment with 
comprehensive plan policies and future land use strategy. 
3.	Expand or adapt city programs 
Many policies in the plan are dependent on city programs and partnerships to realize. These 
programs may be adjusted to make them responsive to updated policies and the community’s 
long-term vision. 
4.	Align city investments 
As the city considers future budgets, spending should consider the advancement of plan policies. 
The city should consider how investments in infrastructure can support the realization of the 
future land use strategy, including the delivery of urban services. 
Prioritizing Implementation Actions 
As part of the Citywide Strategic Plan, strategies will be prioritized. Some considerations 
may include:  
•	
Alignment with the comprehensive plan vision 
•	
Advancement of comprehensive plan policies 
•	
Potential to advance multiple policies
•	
Potential to support the future land use strategy
•	
Urgency, risk or time-sensitive opportunities 
•	
Availability of funding and staffing resources 
•	
Opportunities to leverage partnerships or coordinate with other efforts 
•	
Potential to address disparities and advance equity outcomes 
These considerations help guide decision-making while maintaining flexibility over time.
Focusing on Equity
As the city and county begin implementation, it 
is crucial to look at who benefits and who is 
likely to be negatively impacted. The 
comprehensive plan establishes a guide for 
outcomes that are committed to improving 
access to opportunity, quality of life, housing, 
health and civic participation for all  
community members.
Putting equity into practice means moving 
beyond inclusive processes alone. It means 
focusing on measurable, data-based 
improvements in safety, well-being and 
opportunity, especially for people and 
communities who have been historically 
excluded or have faced a greater share of 
negative impacts and barriers. City equity 
analysis tools and policy evaluation processes 
should help guide planning, project and 
program design, implementation  
and evaluation.
When implementing the plan, city and county 
departments, policymakers and community 
partners should work directly with community 
members to consider questions like:
•	
Are projects and programs reaching 
people and communities with the 
greatest needs?
•	
Are investments helping reduce gaps in 
access to housing, nature, 
transportation, services and  
economic opportunity?
•	
Is trust being built through 
accountability and ongoing relationships 
with historically excluded and 
underrepresented communities?
•	
Are we identifying and addressing 
unintended burdens or risks?
Measuring Progress
For some goals, progress can be measured 
with quantitative data, like reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions, improvements in 
transportation safety or increases in housing 
options. Other goals require a broader set of 
qualitative data, including community 
feedback and lived experience, cross-
department learning and qualitative 
assessments of change. Not everything that 
matters can be captured by a single number or 
set of statistics. It takes a combination of data, 
qualitative feedback and accountability to 
make true progress.
Strength from Within by Melanie Yazzie.


--- Page 65 ---
 129
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Glossary of Terms
This glossary is intended to support a general understanding and consistent interpretation 
of terms used throughout the comprehensive plan. It is not intended to replace or 
supersede more precise or legal definitions established in other city or county plans, 
codes, or regulations. Where more specific definitions exist, those sources should be 
consulted.
Artwork by Cal Brackin.


--- Page 66 ---
130
 131
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Policy Glossary
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
A separate and complete single housing unit 
within a detached dwelling unit or within an 
accessory structure to the principal dwelling 
unit of the lot or parcel on which the unit is 
located.
Annexation
The process of moving unincorporated land 
into a municipality’s boundary and jurisdiction. 
Annexation of unincorporated lands into the 
City of Boulder must meet certain conditions 
established by Colorado Revised Statutes and 
Boulder Revised Code.
Area Median Income (AMI)
The midpoint of a specific region’s income 
distribution, calculated annually by the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD). AMI varies by location and 
household size. AMI is used to determine 
eligibility for affordable housing and rental 
assistance.
Boulder Valley
The area identified in the Boulder Valley 
Comprehensive Plan, Planning Areas Map. The 
Boulder Valley includes land within the city of 
Boulder and portions of unincorporated 
Boulder county.
Capital Improvement
A permanent physical alteration or repair that 
enhances a property’s value, increases its 
useful life or adapts it to new uses. In the city, 
capital improvements are planned on a six-
year timeframe through the Capital 
Improvement Program (CIP).
Community Members
All who live, work, learn, visit or have an 
interest in the community.
Community Resilience Hub
A facility that supports the community during 
both routine and emergency conditions by 
providing essential services, resources and 
safe space. Resilience hubs may offer access 
to water, energy, communications, shelter, 
medical supplies and other critical supports 
during disruptions.
Enclave
Land within unincorporated Boulder County 
that is entirely contained within the outer 
boundaries of the city.
Equity
Equity is an intentional, ongoing process of 
changing policies, practices, and systems to 
eliminate institutional racism and address 
historical disadvantages that have 
disproportionately affected people based on 
gender, sexual orientation, ability, class and 
age, among others. The city focuses on 
leveling the playing field, prioritizing equity as 
a driver for social justice to improve outcomes 
for all community members, particularly those 
most often excluded by government. 
Home-Based Business
A small-scale business operated at a private 
home by the residents that is secondary to the 
residential use.
Language Access
Services that help ensure inclusive 
government and meaningful participation for 
individuals with limited English proficiency, 
focusing on translation, interpretation and 
inclusive engagement.
Level of Service Standards
Metrics that define the minimum acceptable 
capacity, quality and availability of public 
facilities and services necessary to support 
urban development within the Boulder Valley.
Micromobility
Transportation options that are low-speed, 
lightweight, small and can be human or 
electric powered. They can be personally 
owned or use shared services and connected 
technology.
Middle Housing Types
A range of housing types that typically provide 
fewer units than multi-unit buildings but more 
than single-unit dwellings. Examples include 
duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses 
and courtyard clustered units.
Middle-Income Housing
Housing that is affordable to middle income 
households. Middleincome in the city is 
defined as ranging between 80 and 120 
percent of the Area Median Income (AMI).
New Urban Development 
•	
Any proposed development and/or 
redevelopment within Area 1-Urban Lands.
•	
Any proposed development and/or 
redevelopment within Area 2-Urban Edge, 
Area 3-Rural Preservation or Area 
3-Planning Reserve that is determined to 
require additional services to be provided 
by the city.
•	
Any proposed development and/or 
redevelopment within Area 2-Urban Edge, 
Area 3-Rural Preservation or Area 
3-Planning Reserve that is determined to 
be inconsistent with the Boulder Valley 
Comprehensive Plan or Boulder County 
Land Use Code.
Over-Intensive Rural Development
Development or redevelopment of land within 
Area 3 that, due to its scale, intensity or 
impacts is determined to be inconsistent with 
the surrounding rural character and the intent 
to preserve that character. The following are 
examples of factors to be considered when 
determining over-intensive rural development:
•	
Project Scale
•	
Project Intensity
•	
On-site disturbance and creation of 
impervious surface
•	
Off-site impacts such as traffic or increased 
activity
•	
Adequacy of public services and/or 
infrastructure
Permanently Affordable Housing
A home whose affordability is legally 
protected in perpetuity through a deed 
restriction, covenant or land trust.
Service Area
The geographic area where the city may 
provide urban services and is already within 
city limits or where  annexation is supported by 
the plan. The service area includes the 
following planning areas: Area 1-Urban Lands 
and Area 2-Urban Edge.
Substantially Developed
An area or parcel that is already improved or 
built out (e.g. with structures, roads or utilities) 
to the degree that opportunities for significant 
additional development are limited.


--- Page 67 ---
132
 133
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Urban Conflagration
A large fire, often uncontrollable, that spreads 
rapidly through urban and/or densely 
populated areas. This type of emergency is 
often caused by wind-driven embers from 
wildfires, when typical fire suppression 
measures, typically located at the wildland-
urban interface are overwhelmed by the event. 
In Colorado, wildfire initiated community 
conflagration (WICC) is becoming more 
common. 
Urban Services
Services provided by the City of Boulder 
including public water, public sewer, 
stormwater and flood management, urban fire 
protection and emergency medical care, urban 
police protection, multi-modal transportation 
and developed urban parks.
Urban Service Provider
An entity responsible for planning, financing, 
operating and maintaining adequate urban 
services.
Vision Zero
Vision Zero is the community’s goal to 
eliminate all severe traffic-related crashes that 
result in a serious injury or fatality.  
Wraparound Services
A coordinated approach to service delivery 
that addresses a range of needs of individuals 
or households, including health, social, 
educational and supportive services.
Wraparound services are intended to provide 
integrated support, improve outcomes and 
enhance well-being across multiple aspects of 
daily life.
Future Land Use Glossary
The following terms are used to define expectations for the Future Land Use designations in this 
plan.
Accessory Commercial Unit
A commercial space located within a 
residential parcel that is secondary to the 
primary residential use.
Agriculture
Includes the cultivation of soils and crops and 
the raising of animals to provide food, fiber, 
and other products.
Arts, Culture and Entertainment
Private facilities that provide entertainment for 
a fee, such as theaters, cinemas, music venues 
and cultural event venues.
Attached Unit
Housing unit that is attached to another 
housing unit via shared walls, roofs, or 
foundations and feature independent 
entrances, kitchens, and bathrooms. Examples 
include townhomes, duplexes, and triplexes.
Detached Unit
A standalone, self-contained principal housing 
unit that shares no walls, roofs, or foundations 
with other buildings. 
Education
Provide instructional, academic, or training 
services, including public or private schools, 
colleges, universities, and specialized 
educational or research institutions.
Food and Beverage
Includes establishments that prepare and 
serve food or beverages for consumption, on or 
off the premises, including restaurants, cafes, 
bars, and similar services that may serve 
residents, workers, or visitors.
Zoning
The local regulatory system that regulates 
land uses and development for each property. 
Zoning for the City of Boulder is defined in the 
Boulder Revised Code and zoning for Boulder 
County is defined in the Boulder County Land 
Use Code.
Government, Healthcare and Institutional
Public or nonprofit facilities that provide 
governmental services, healthcare, social 
services, or institutional functions for the 
community.
Group Living
A residential structure whose uses are 
characterized by needs of a specified group of 
people. The residents may receive any 
combination of care, meals, or treatment, as 
long as they also reside at the site. Examples 
include assisted living facilities, skilled nursing 
facilities and residential treatments centers.
Heavy Industrial
Includes larger-scale manufacturing, 
processing, or material handling that may 
generate higher levels of noise, emissions, or 
truck traffic and typically require separation 
from sensitive land uses.
Light Industrial
Includes manufacturing, processing, assembly, 
repair, or fabrication activities conducted 
within enclosed buildings and generally 
producing limited noise, vibration, odor, or 
traffic impacts. Includes indoor agricultural 
facilities.
Lodging
Provides temporary accommodation for 
visitors, travelers, or guests, including hotels, 
motels, inns, and similar facilities, often with 
accessory services such as meeting rooms, 
dining, or limited retail.


--- Page 68 ---
134
 135
THE BOULDER VALLEY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Maker, Artisan and Innovation
Includes on-site creation of custom or 
handcrafted goods using hand tools or small 
equipment. May include accessory retail sales, 
classes, demonstrations, and limited events 
that support production activities.
Multi-Unit
Housing unit structure that typically includes 
more than four housing units and features 
shared entrances and amenities. Examples 
include apartments, efficiency living units, and 
condominiums.
Office
Includes businesses providing professional, 
financial, administrative, medical or technical 
services to individuals or other businesses, 
including accounting, legal, insurance, real 
estate, counseling, publishing, architecture, 
engineering, and design services. Shared or 
co-working spaces, typically accessed through 
membership or lease arrangements, are 
included.
Open Lands
Includes undeveloped areas that may have 
value for open space purposes.
Open Space Purposes
Open Space purposes is generally defined as 
including, but not limited to, preservation and 
restoration of natural habitat and features, 
agricultural stewardship, floodplain protection, 
education, cultural resource protection and 
passive recreation. 
Purposes are more specifically defined by the 
City of Boulder Charter or county open space 
tax-enabling ballot language. For reference, 
the City of Boulder Charter states:
Open space land shall be acquired, maintained, 
preserved, retained, and used only for the 
following purposes:
•	
Preservation or restoration of natural areas 
characterized by or including terrain, 
geologic formations, flora, or fauna that are 
unusual, spectacular, historically important, 
scientifically valuable, or unique, or that 
represent outstanding or rare examples of 
native species;
•	
Preservation of water resources in their 
natural or traditional state, scenic areas or 
vistas, wildlife habitats, or fragile 
ecosystems;
•	
Preservation of land for passive 
recreational use, such as hiking, 
photography or nature studies, and, if 
specifically designated, bicycling, 
horseback riding, or fishing;
•	
Preservation of agricultural uses and land 
suitable for agricultural production;
•	
Utilization of land for shaping the 
development of the city, limiting urban 
sprawl, and disciplining growth;
•	
Utilization of non-urban land for spatial 
definition of urban areas;
•	
Utilization of land to prevent encroachment 
on floodplains; and
•	
Preservation of land for its aesthetic or 
passive recreational value and its 
contribution to the quality of life of the 
community.
Personal Service
Provides personal services for the convenience 
of the neighborhood, including, without 
limitation, hair salons, nail or skin care salons, 
tattoo parlors, dry cleaners, laundromats, 
bakeries, pharmacies, or automatic teller 
machines. These uses also include personal 
goods repair such as bicycle, watch, shoe, 
phone, or similar items, as well as alternative 
healthcare and wellness services not provided 
by a medical doctor or physician.
Places of Worship
Used for religious worship, assembly, 
educations, and associated community 
activities.
Public Realm
All publicly owned, accessible spaces, 
including streets, sidewalks, paths, plazas, 
courtyards and urban outdoor public spaces 
which contribute to connectivity and enhance 
the aesthetic and social life in the community.  
Recreation, Active
Indoor or outdoor recreation activities that are 
motorized or require specialized equipment or 
development of permanent facilities and 
infrastructure such as turf fields, pools, courts, 
gyms or parks.
Recreation, Passive
Non-motorized, outdoor recreation activities 
that offer mental and physical benefits, rely 
upon the natural setting as an integral part of 
the experience, and require only minimal 
infrastructure and services. Examples include 
hiking, biking, rock climbing, nature study, 
horseback riding, and fishing. Individual 
entities may have unique definitions and 
policies relevant to passive recreation that are 
specifically defined with departmental 
guidelines.
Research and Development
Includes product or process design, 
development, prototyping or testing, which 
may include laboratory, office, warehousing, 
and light manufacturing functions in support 
of innovation-based industries.
Retail
Includes selling of goods or merchandise 
directly to the ultimate consumer and 
supporting uses such as sales, rentals and 
incidental servicing of products generally 
provided on the premises to consumers.
Transition Area
An area approximately one-half city block (150 
feet) on either side of a boundary between Hub 
and/or Neighborhood class land use 
designations where either land use designation 
can apply when considering consistency with 
the comprehensive plan policies and future 
land use strategy. Transition Areas are not 
applicable to any boundaries with Systems or 
Special Purpose class land use designations.
Urban Agriculture
Small-scale agricultural production and/or 
animal husbandry within urban areas.
Utility Operations
Support public services such as water, 
wastewater, energy generation or 
transmission, communications, and solid waste 
management.
Vehicle-Related
Associated with the sale, lease, fueling, 
charging, washing, servicing, or repair of 
vehicles, including automobiles, bicycles, and 
micromobility devices.
Warehousing and Distribution
Primarily dedicated to the storage, handling, 
and distribution of goods, materials or 
products, including fulfillment centers, 
logistics operations, and associated loading 
and delivery functions.


--- Page 69 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]
