--- Page 1 ---
racial
plan
equity
s er vice
innovation
Integrity
customer
c ol l ab or ati on
re sp e c t
s er vice
innovation
In e tg r ity
customer
c ol l ab or ati on
resp e c t
FEBRUARY  2 0 2 1
 
 


--- Page 2 ---
2 
Contents 
Acknowledgements .........................................................................................................3 
Introduction..........................................................................................................................5 
— Purpose of The Plan................................................................................................................6 
— Why lead with racial equity? ...................................................................................................6 
— A Message From the City’s Racial Equity Guiding Coalition................................................... 7 
Racial Equity Plan In The City of Boulder Context ......................................8 
— Advancing Existing Goals .......................................................................................................8 
— Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan.......................................................................................8 
— Human Rights and Human Services.......................................................................................8 
— City Vision and Values ............................................................................................................9 
— Sustainability and Resilience Framework...............................................................................9 
The Journey Here: Racial History of The City of Boulder .....................10 
Timeline of Work To Date ..........................................................................14 
Racial Equity Engagement Working Group ...........................................18 
Community Feedback On Racial Equity Plan Outline ....................... 19 
Planning Timeframe and Tracking Progress ........................................ 20 
Goals and Strategies ..................................................................................................... 21 
— Goal 1: Everybody gets it. ...................................................................................................... 21 
— Goal 2: Justly do it.................................................................................................................22 
— Goal 3: Community commitment. ........................................................................................22 
— Goal 4: Power to all people. ................................................................................................. 23 
— Goal 5: Representation matters. .......................................................................................... 23 
Logic Model............................................................................................................................24 
— Short Term Outcomes: Logic Model Visual Guide................................................................24 
— Full Logic Model................................................................................................................... 26 
Resources .............................................................................................................................. 30 
— Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 30 
— Racial Inequity Data..............................................................................................................32 
— Racial History....................................................................................................................... 42 


--- Page 3 ---
3 
Acknowledgements  
City Manager’s Office 
— Tanya Ange, former Deputy City Manager 
— Jane Brautigam, former City Manager 
— Pam Davis, Assistant City Manager 
— Aimee Kane, Equity Program Manager 
— Chris Meschuk, Interim City Manager 
— Taylor Reiman, Council Assistant 
Racial Equity Guiding Coalition 
2019 to Present 
— Aaron Brockett, City Council Member 
— Kurt Firnhaber, Director of Housing and Human Services 
— Rachel Friend, City Council Member 
— Maris Herold, Police Chief 
— Junie Joseph, City Council Member 
— Jacob Lindsey, Director of Planning and Development Services 
— Chris Meschuk, Interim City Manager 
— Jen Sprinkle, Director of Human Resources  
— Adam Swetlik, City Council Member 
— Mary Young, City Council Member  
Racial Equity Engagement Working Group 
— Ingrid Castro-Campos 
— Dr. Sheila Davis 
— Ken Iha 
— Magnolia Landa-Posas, Facilitator 
— Marina La Grave 
— Nikhil Mankekar 
— Maria Murillo 
— Julie Schoenfeld 
Community Feedback Partners 
— Ana Karina Casas Ibarra, Community Connector  
— Dinesh Kumar Karki, Community Connector 
— City of Boulder Human Relations Commission 
— City of Boulder Youth Opportunities Advisory Board  
— Leadership Fellows Boulder County 
— NAACP, Boulder County 
— Nepal America Sociocultural Exchange Society 
— Recovery Equity Connectors 
— Rocky Mountain Friends of Nepal  
— Sabrina Sideris’ CU Class 
— SUMA Cultural Brokers, Boulder County 
— Diversity and Inclusion Summit, University of Colorado Boulder 


--- Page 4 ---
4 
Acknowledgements  
Racial Equity Core Team and Equity Ambassadors 
City Attorney’s Office 
— David Gehr 
— Jessica Pault-Atiase 
City Manager’s Office 
— Carl Castillo 
— Pam Davis 
— Elesha Johnson 
— Joseph Lipari 
— Amy McMahon 
— Chris Meschuk 
Communication and Engagement 
— Shannon Aulabaugh 
— Shelby Condit 
— Ryan Hanschen 
— Brenda Ritenour 
— Emily Sandoval  
— Manuela Sifuentes 
Climate Initiatives 
— Elizabeth Vasatka 
Fire-Rescue 
— David Garcia 
— Jeff Long 
Finance 
— Juciene Azevedo-Wilk 
— Joel Wagner 
Housing and Human Services 
— Ana Silvia Avendaño-Curiel 
— Elizabeth Crowe 
— Clay Fong 
— Renee Gallegos 
— Wanda Pelegrina Caldas 
— German Velasco 
— Eli Urken 
Human Resources  
— Jasmine Berginc 
— Hope Stevens 
Innovation and Technology 
— Katie Bridges 
— Benjamin Edelen  
— Leslie Labrecque 
— Bill Skerpan 
Library and Arts 
— Matt Chasansky 
— Krissy Jenkins 
— Jaime Kopke 
— Ann Ledford 
— Jennifer Lord 
— Jennifer Phares  
Municipal Court 
— James Cho 
— DeVon KissickKelly 
— Maryvel Molina 
Open Space and Mountain Parks 
— Casey Bries 
— Juliet Bonnell 
— Maki Boyle 
— Mark Davison 
— Lauren Kilcoyne 
— Emily Paulson 
— Natasha Steinmann 
Parks and Recreation 
— Stephanie Munro 
— Lisa Nieman 
— Ali Rhodes 
— Christy Spielman 
Planning and Development Services 
— Charles Ferro  
— Val Matheson 
— Dwayne Sullivan 
Police 
— Michael Everett 
— Diane Herzberg 
— Curtis Johnson 
— Tom Trujillo  
— Carey Weinheimer 
Public Works 
— Kate Gregory 
— Amy Lewin 
— Katie Knapp 
— Natalie Stiffler 
— Holly Valenta 
Graphic Design: Shelby Condit, Maye Cordero 


--- Page 5 ---
5 
Respect is one of five of the city of Boulder’s organizational values. It states: 
While the city created a diversity policy over two decades ago, an inclusivity assessment conducted 
in 2017 demonstrated the organization’s impact has been limited. Input from community members of 
color who have bravely shared their perspectives and lived experiences have made it clear we have 
significant work to do. 
As partner members of the Government Alliance on Race and Equity and through shared learning 
with communities across the nation, employees and leadership at the City of Boulder have been 
working to understand the role institutional racism has played in perpetuating current racial 
inequities and develop a vision to advance racial equity through education, programs, policies and 
budget decisions. 
“We champion diversity and welcome individual 
perspectives, backgrounds and opinions. We are open-minded 
and treat all individuals with respect and dignity.” 
Introduction 
Since 2018, the city has been building organizational capacity and partnering with institutions and 
communities to adapt internal infrastructure and communication through creation of a Racial Equity 
Plan. Much of the plan focuses on steps the city must take to eliminate systemic and institutional 
racism in its policies and practices. 
There are also several components that will involve partnerships with community groups, 
organizations and individuals committed to ending racial inequity in Boulder. The plan was informed 
by significant and valuable community input, and the city drew from other sources such as: : 
— Findings of the 2017 Community Perceptions Assessment 
— From the courageous personal stories shared more recently by community members of color 
in sessions hosted by the Human Relations Commission and City Council 
— Frequent conversations with organizations that work with historically oppressed communities 
— Participation in the yearly Diversity Summit at the University of Colorado Boulder 
— Additional feedback was provided through various community feedback sessions as designed 
by the city’s Racial Equity Engagement Working Group and included in Community Feedback 
Summary attachment 
Purpose  o f  t h e  plan  


--- Page 6 ---
6 
Race is often the greatest predictor of 
access to success in our current system. 
The creation and perpetuation of racial inequities is embedded into 
government at all levels.  Initially focusing on racial equity provides 
the opportunity to introduce a framework, tools and resources that 
can also be applied to other marginalized groups based on gender, 
sexual orientation, ability, class, and age, among others. 
If one of us suffers, we all suffer. 
W h y  lead  with  racial  equity ?  


--- Page 7 ---
7 
Modern day Boulder has struggled to face its history. With this document, we put forth our 
commitment to change with actions and measurable outcomes, because, to paraphrase James 
Baldwin, nothing can be changed until it is faced. 
The following Racial Equity Plan is a result of a collaborative effort among several partners dedicated 
to advancing racial equity within the City of Boulder government to transform Boulder into a more 
inclusive, safe, and welcoming environment for all who live, work, learn or recreate in our community. 
The plan was guided by City of Boulder employees who were members of the city’s first Racial Equity 
Core team, a group of over 60 city staff committed to learning from our partners at the Government 
Alliance on Race and Equity (GARE), a nationally known non-profit segment of Race Forward. 
These employees, from all areas of the organization, representing all levels of leadership, have been 
collectively working in community for over two years to bring before all of us this plan of strategies 
and actions that, with commitment to measurable outcomes, have the capacity to change our 
community and hold us to our values. 
We know the work ahead will not be easy. The work of dismantling institutional racism will require 
that some of us give up some comfort and power. Nevertheless, without doing so, we cannot live up 
to our stated values. 
Sincerely, 
The City of Boulder’s Racial Equity Guiding Coalition 
A Message from the City of Boulder 
Racial Equity Guiding Coalition 
Council Member 
Aaron Brockett 
Council Member 
Rachel Friend 
Council Member 
Junie Joseph 
Council Member 
Mary Young 
Interim 
City Manager 
Chris Meschuk 
Equity Program 
Manager 
Aimee Kane 
Director of 
Housing and 
Human Services 
Kurt Firnhaber 
Director of 
Human Resources 
Jennifer Sprinkle 
Council Member 
Adam Swetlik 
Police Chief 
Maris Herold 
Planning & 
Development 
Services Director 
Jacob Lindsey 


--- Page 8 ---
8 
Racial Equity Plan in the City of Boulder Context 
Advancing  existing  equity  goals  
The City of Boulder is guided by the City Charter. The Racial Equity Plan advances and aligns with the Charter 
as well as established community-wide goals and plans, including the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan, the 
Sustainability and Resilience Framework and other citywide guidance.  The city’s plans, goals and policies are 
also informed by federal, state, and county guidance, including that of the Government Alliance on Race and 
Equity (GARE). The following graphic shows the relationship of the current plan and policy documents that 
guide the management of the City of Boulder in relation to racial equity.  
Boulder  Va lley  Comprehensive  Plan  
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan (BVCP) is developed and jointly adopted by the City of Boulder and 
Boulder County to guide land use decisions in the Boulder Valley. Intended to integrate a range of community 
service areas, the BVCP provides high-level policies and goals that stem from long-standing community values. 
These represent our commitment to:  
— A welcoming, inclusive and diverse community 
— Physical health, safety and well-being 
— An all-mode transportation system to make getting around easy and accessible to everyone 
— A diversity of housing types of price ranges 
— Great neighborhoods and public spaces 
— Sustainability and more 
Adopted in 1977, the City of Boulder and Boulder County update the plan periodically. The BVCP supports 
the community’s vision for balancing development and preservation of the Boulder Valley. The BVCP reflects 
the city’s sustainability and resilience framework, described below. In turn, master plans and the city’s annual 
capital and operation budget outline the strategies designed to achieve BVCP’s goals. 
 


--- Page 9 ---
9 
Sustainability  a n d  Resilience  Framework  
The City of Boulder is continuously working to fulfill its vision. The Sustainability and Resilience Framework 
helps provide a common language for all city departments, the local community and the Boulder City Council 
about what makes a great community. The Sustainability and Resilience Framework aligns city government 
with a wide range of community priorities to evaluate whether expectations are being met and to adjust, if 
necessary. 
To realize the city’s vision of “service excellence for an inspired future,” the Sustainability and Resilience 
Framework establishes seven broad outcome categories which also align with the Racial Equity Plan. The 
annual budget, as well as strategic plans and master plans, develop strategies to achieve those outcomes. 
Elements of the Sustainability and Resilience Framework are:   
Human  Rights  a n d  Human  Services  
Many other city policies and programs provide context for, and are in alignment with, the Racial Equity Plan. 
For example, the city’s Human Rights Ordinance, overseen by the city’s Office of Human Rights and the 
Human Relations Commission, affords protection against discrimination in housing, employment and public 
accommodation. 
The city’s inclusionary housing goals and funding programs, including but not limited to those outlined in the 
regional HOME Consortium Consolidated Plan; direct services to low-income and Latino families and older 
adults; Community Mediation program and investment programs like the Health Equity Fund and Human 
Services Fund are designed to address socio-economic inequities that often disproportionately impact 
people of color.  
Building on this foundation, the Racial Equity Plan provides citywide goals and strategies that align with 
existing guidance, as well as guidance to thoroughly inventory and review existing policies. 
This will be done using the racial equity instrument to identify and begin to remove bias and any unintended 
resulting inequities. The racial equity instrument will also be used to develop new departmental and 
citywide policies to advance racial equity and change citywide habits, processes and decision-making.  
For a more in-depth description of the city’s vision and values, please refer to the city culture webpage. 
City  vision  a n d  values  
A l l  city  departments  
a n d  staff  follow  city  
manager  guidance  i n  
t h e  form  o f  following  
a  shared  vision  a n d  
s e t  o f  values .    
City of Boulder Vision 
Service excellence for an inspired future  
City of Boulder Values 
Customer Service 
Respect 
Integrity 
Collaboration 
Innovation 
— Safe Community 
— Healthy and Socially Thriving Community 
— Livable Community 
— Accessible and Connected Community 
— Environmentally Sustainable Community 
— Economically Vital Community 
— Good Governance 


--- Page 10 ---
10 
The Journey Here 
F or thous ands o f y e ar s 
generations of 
Indigenous Peoples 
lived in and traversed the Boulder Valley – enriching countless oral and tribal 
traditions that shaped a special connection to the land.1 However, miners during the 
beginning of the Gold Rush and a steady influx of white occupiers violated treaties 
and forcibly removed tribes from the Boulder area, severing their connection with 
the land. For thousands of Indigenous Peoples who live in reservations outside of 
Colorado – and for those who live in Boulder today – traditions, stories and languages 
passed down over the generations still connect them with Boulder  lands. 
In 1858, the first non-native community in Boulder County was established in the 
area now known as Settler’s Park, in violation of the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie. Many 
of the Indigenous inhabitants were killed or forced to relocate as a result of these 
white occupiers. In addition, white residents of Boulder played a key role in the Sand 
Creek Massacre, which set off a long series of conflicts leading to the Battle of Little 
Bighorn and concluding with the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre.2 
In later decades, the local and state governments continued deliberate 
discrimination against Indigenous Peoples and immigrant people of color, including 
Asian railroad workers, African Americans and Mexicans. In the 1920s, the Ku Klux 
Klan (KKK) developed a strong presence in the state, and many members held various 
positions in elected office and in government administration. The rise of the Klan 
in Boulder and Colorado paralleled the nationwide ascendancy of the Second Ku 
Klux Klan. This began in the mid-1910s, as the belief that the cause of the former 
Confederacy was justified — known as the “Lost Cause” mythos — gained traction.3 
The KKK eventually became a powerful organization in Boulder County and at 
the state level, and many of the attacks in Boulder County were targeted at Latino 
individuals. Their exclusion from the community was exemplified in signs saying “No 
Mexicans Allowed” posted in front of shops and restaurants across Colorado. In 1922, 
the Klan organized four parades through the town of Boulder. One included nearly 300 
Klansmen, 63 cars and a float covered in white.4 
1 City of Boulder Tribal Nations and Indigenous Peoples Collaborations. Retrieved from: https://cityofboulder.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/sites/CMO/RECT/_ 
layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B933f44b9-df29-4266-9420-008fa47c2266%7D&action=edit&wdPid=7f4cbeaa 
2 Two key Boulder leaders of the Sand Creek Massacre were David Nichols and John Chivington. In 1863, Nichols was elected Boulder Sheriff, but left that 
post the following year to join the Third Colorado Volunteer Cavalry as a captain. Governor John Evans tasked this unit with the suppression of indigenous 
peoples. As a military officer, Nichols participated in the Sand Creek Massacre on November 29, 1864. After, Nichols left the sheriff ’s office having been 
elected to the Territorial Legislature. In this capacity, he played a key role in the formation of the University of Colorado at Boulder. Retreived from: https:// 
www.cpr.org/show-segment/when-to-stop-honoring-a-questionable-historical-figure-cus-had-that-debate/,  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_H._ 
Nichols 
Colonel John Chivington commanded the US Army forces at Sand Creek, and organized a Masonic Lodge in Gold Hill.  Retrieved from: https://www.nps. 
gov/sand/learn/historyculture/john-chivington-biography.htm, https://www.dailycamera.com/2014/11/15/boulder-county-shares-in-sand-creek-massacre-
infamy/, http://www.coloradofreemasons.org/pdfDocuments/chivington.pdf 
Historical legacy of Sand Creek and continued conflict with indigenous peoples. Retrieved from: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/horrific-sand-
creek-massacre-will-be-forgotten-no-more-180953403/, https://www.nps.gov/articles/sandcreek.htm 
3 “When Bigotry Paraded Through the Streets” (2016). Retrieved from: https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/second-klan/509468/ 
4 Bowley, Nicoli R., “Ten Dollars to Hate Somebody”: Hispanic Communities and the Ku Klux Klan in Colorado, 1917-1925 (2017)Retrieved from: https:// 
scholar.colorado.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2497&context=honr_theses 
Continued on next page 
Racia l H isto ry  of  t h e  C i ty  of  B ou lde r 
Before endeavoring to advance racial equity, it is important 
to understand some of the City of Boulder’s racial past. 


--- Page 11 ---
11 
Due to a labor shortage, the immigrant work force was somewhat welcomed for 
a short time throughout the early to mid-twentieth century. However, after demand 
subsided and laborers were less needed, people were sent away. On May 18, 1932, 
the Boulder County Commissioners passed a resolution funding the deportation 
of Mexican families to the United States-Mexico border based on “there being no 
prospect of them finding employment.”5 
During the first half of the 20th century, explicit racism gave way to more implicit 
forms of racism, legally continuing racial and socio-economic segregation. Early 
zoning maps and regulations were used throughout the U.S. to prevent racial and 
ethnic minorities from moving into middle- and upper-class neighborhoods.6 Federal 
policies such as redlining and discriminatory lending practices were common practice 
that effectively denied the American dream of homeownership to many people of 
color.7 
Local policies are and have been more nuanced, but often still lead to similar 
disparate impacts as those of explicitly discriminatory policies. A citywide height 
limit on new construction (ca. 55 feet) to maintain scenic views of the foothills and 
Flatirons prevented the city from growing upwards. The height limit, the green belt 
that limited outward expansion of housing, and the fact that a significant portion of 
the city is zoned exclusively for single-family residential development, all indirectly 
contribute to the high cost of housing in Boulder.8 
The high cost of housing in Boulder creates a growing economic divide within 
the community.9 Boulder also places a high value on community engagement 
in the development process, which increases the time and cost to build homes. 
The imposition of affordable housing impact fees and inclusionary housing 
requirements that provide permanently affordable housing have the indirect impact 
of increasing the cost of all residential development. Anecdotally, Boulder’s high 
design expectations, energy efficiency and climate goals, limited vacant land for 
development, high proportion of jobs to homes, and numerous other polices all have 
an indirect impact on housing costs. Combined with the historic federal policies and 
the lack of opportunity to build generational wealth, high housing costs continue to 
impact who can afford to live in Boulder. 
It is important to recognize the racial disparities in Boulder’s demographics do not 
rest solely on zoning and housing policies. In 1974, the City of Boulder elected its first 
and only Black mayor, Penfield Tate II. He was mayor until 1976. Tate advocated for 
equality for all and took action to protect the LGBTQ+community and make them feel 
more welcome.10 
5 Boulder County Commissioners’ Resolution, agreeing to pay train fare for unemployed Mexican families to the border, May 18, 1932. Retrieved from: 
https://teachbocolatinohistory.colorado.edu 
6 Silver, Christopher, The Racial Origins of Zoning in American Cities. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications (1997) 
7 Race: The Power of an Illusion Ep. 3 https://www.racepowerofanillusion.org/episodes/three 
8 Babcock, Richard; Fred Bosselman, Exclusionary Zoning: Land Use Regulation and Housing in the 1970s. New York: Praeger Publishers (1973) 
9 2019 Community Profile. The chart comparing the median sales price of detached and attached homes in Boulder shows a divergence between housing 
prices and income starting in 2012. A household needs to earn approximately $200,000 a year to afford the median home price in Boulder (assuming 3.5% 
interest rate, typical homeowner expenses and the homeowner pays no more than 1/3 of their income on housing) https://www-static.bouldercolorado.gov/
docs/Middle_Income_Housing_Strategy_October_2016-1-201611221422.pdf 
10 Taylor, Carol, Boulder’s LGBT history has many lessons to teach, including that backlash often follows progress (2016). Retrieved from http://getboul-
der.com/boulders-lgbt-history/ 
Raci a l  Histo r y  of  the  C ity  of  B o u lde r,  c o nti nued 


--- Page 12 ---
12 
He attempted to introduce a sexual preference amendment to Boulder’s Human 
Rights Ordinance, but it lost adoption by the general public. Residents then sought to 
recall Tate and all council members who supported the amendment. While the recall of 
Tate failed, he did not win in the next election.11Tate is quoted as saying, “The measure 
of a great city and a great country is not the size of its greenbelt but how it treats its 
people.” 
A 2015 article in Boulder Weekly “Black in Boulder: Boulder racism through the eyes 
of people of color” sums up the reality for people of color living in Boulder: 
“I think, generally speaking, people in Boulder pride themselves 
on being very liberal, very progressive. On top of that, they’re very 
well off overall. I think that idea of liberalism sometimes blinds 
to the notion of where people in this community contribute to 
the perpetuation of white privilege or white supremacy — even if 
they aren’t of mind or heart, a person who thinks that these other 
people are less than.” 
From 2012 to 2017, civil rights complaints that pertained to unequal treatment in 
employment, housing charges and public accommodations increased in Boulder. 
The Community Perception Assessment of Boulder12 and the Human Relations 
Commission Speak-out event in 2018 revealed stories of Muslim women afraid to 
wear headscarves, because they were being insulted in the streets; parents driving 
their children to Longmont for school, because they were being treated differently 
by teachers and school administration in Boulder; and people being followed by 
employees in stores because of the color of their skin. 
Across the United States, a person’s race remains a key predictor of access, 
opportunity, safety, and well-being. Boulder is no exception to this. According to the 
American Community Survey, in 2017 the overall poverty rate in Boulder County was 
12.6% for white individuals but jumped to an average of 23.4% for all other races and 
23.5% for Latino county residents. Over the years, the City of Boulder has attempted 
to examine, as individuals and groups, what diversity, equity and inclusion mean to our 
organization and community. Despite these efforts and good intentions, this work has 
had limited success in improving racial equity. 
As described above, policies and decisions were driven by a variety of motivations. 
Actions ranged from unquestionably racist to well-meaning and popularly supported 
but lacking consideration of long-term, unintended consequences. These events 
and actions were not unique to Boulder and occurred throughout the United 
11 University of Colorado Boulder, Penfield Wallace Tate II (1968), retrieved from https://www.colorado.edu/law/pen-wallace-tate-ii-68 
12 Community Perception Assessment of Boulder as a Safe and Inclusive Communit. Retrieved from: https://www-static.bouldercolorado.gov/docs/CPA-1-
202003061252.pdf 
Raci a l  H isto r y  of  the  C ity  of  B o u lde r,  co nti nued 


--- Page 13 ---
13 
States. However, a more recent rising awareness of racial equity provides us with a 
contemporary opportunity to scrutinize past decisions through a new lens. We are in 
a position to consider both socio-economic and racial factors while correcting harms 
that originated in the past. 
To be clear, this plan does not advocate for reversing past policy decisions. Rather, 
the challenge now is to ensure our policies reflect all community values, including 
environmental protection, quality of life and racial and soci-economic equity. To do 
this, we must train a critical eye on past policies and consider their impacts in future 
decision-making as we actively promote measures to help resolve inequity. 
The city intends to understand its relationship with race and is endeavoring 
to create systems in order to collect data that supports a deeper understanding 
of its actions and impacts, as well as data to help identify and track outcomes of 
racial equity work. In December 2019, the City Council of the City of Boulder passed 
Resolution 127513 “…committing the City of Boulder to promote racial equity in city 
relationships, programs, services and policies.” 
The City of Boulder has historically leveraged its local resources to push policy 
efforts upwards to effect systemic change. Like climate policy and policies that 
address root causes of homelessness, both rooted in consequences of past policy 
decisions, the city’s efforts to address Racial Equity should be part of a broader 
regional, state and national effort. We cannot and should not do this alone. We must 
work together to accomplish scalable change to rectify a system that, for too long, 
has continued to cause so much harm. 
13 Council Resolution #1275. Retrieved from: https://www-static.bouldercolorado.gov/docs/signed_copy_of_Res_1275-1-202004221428.pdf?_ 
ga=2.95372383.2144821488.1611337950-18428063.1598546093 
Find more resources about the racial history of Boulder at the end of this Racial Equity Plan. 
Raci a l  H isto r y  of  the  C ity  of  B o u lde r,  co nti nued 


--- Page 14 ---
14 
The City of Boulder has a history, commitment, and intention of improving the ability to 
welcome, support and serve people of diverse backgrounds within the community and 
city organization. The city’s first diversity policy was developed more than twenty years 
ago, and efforts continue to this day. 
Brief chronology of key, equity-related milestones to date 
1973 
The city established the Human Relations Commission by ordinance, which had begun its work for the city 
in the late 1960s. The commission focused on community relations in its formative years, holding public 
meetings and issuing reports on a range of social issues: race relations, homelessness, services for seniors 
and youth and poverty, among others. 
1999 — 2004 
The City of Boulder established agreements with 13 federally recognized American Indian Tribal Nations. These 
agreements recognized that Tribal Nations and the city share several common open space interests, including 
preserving the land and cultural resources and providing access for ceremonial practices on open space lands. 
2005 
In response to a series of hate-motivated incidents Frank Bruno who was the city manager at the time, 
established a commitment to developing mechanisms to ensure rapid response to hate incidents as well as 
ongoing effective engagement with community groups. 
2006 
Establishment of an Inclusiveness and Diversity Team (IDT) to further a City Council initiative ensuring the 
organization models the ideals of inclusion and diversity.  
2008 
City’s first partnership with CU’s Office of Diversity, Equity and Community Engagement on the CU Diversity 
Summit. 
2009 
IDT published an ID plan and toolkit as a resource for departments wanting to create their own tailored equity 
plans. 
2009 — 2016 
Various trainings and other resources were provided to employees by the IDT on topics such as socio-
economic diversity, invisible disabilities, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) issues.  
2012 
The city embarked on its vision and values initiative and adopted the value of Respect “We champion diversity 
and welcome individual perspectives, backgrounds and opinions. We are open-minded and treat all individuals 
with respect and dignity.” 
2015 
Boulder City Council adopted Resolution No. 1178 as drafted by the Human Relations Commission re-affirming 
Boulder’s status as and commitment to be an inclusive community, its commitment to working with local 
partners to improve support for and inclusion of diversity, and encouraging other jurisdictions and their 
elected leaders to do the same. 
Timeline of Work To Date 


--- Page 15 ---
15 
2016 
— The city organization refocused on equity with the first Employee Engagement survey to determine a 
baseline level of employee understanding, value and support of inclusion and diversity. 
— In collaboration with community members and the Human Relations commission, Boulder City Council 
Adopted Resolution No. 1190 a resolution declaring the second Monday of October of each year to be 
Indigenous Peoples Day.  The resolution acknowledges that: 
— The Boulder area encompasses ancestral homelands of Indigenous Peoples’ Nations. 
— Indigenous People in Boulder have, as in all parts of the Americas, endured centuries of 
cruelty, exploitation and genocide. 
— Facing and acknowledging our past, good as well as bad, makes our community stronger and more 
resilient. 
— Boulder has benefited directly from Indian removal policies that violated human rights, broke 
government treaties and forced [Indigenous Peoples] from their homeland. 
— Those now living on these ancestral lands recognize that harm was done and acknowledge that we 
have a shared responsibility to forge a path forward to address the past and continuing harm to the 
Indigenous People and the land. 
2017 
— City Council added Chapter 12-5 “Undocumented Persons” to the Boulder Revised Code declaring the City 
of Boulder as a Sanctuary City. 
— Community Perceptions Assessment finding a persistent lack of inclusion and safety, particularly by non-
majority community members and newcomers. 
— Results from assessment informed the Human Relations Commission’s 2018-2020  work plan, which 
included: expanding community outreach and education to increase visibility of and dialogue about 
issues that are barriers to a welcoming and inclusive community; expanding public participation by 
scheduling events at times and locations convenient to all members of the public; and supporting 
community awareness and education activities of local organizations. 
2018 
— In early March 2018, the Boulder City Council passed an ordinance amending the fire code to allow 
community members to conduct ceremonial fires within the city via permit.  
— The City of Boulder entered partnership with the Government Alliance on Race and Equity and shifted 
its equity efforts from administering surveys and assessments to gauge awareness, strengths, and 
opportunities; to becoming more strategic, operationalized and focused on equity as a value integrated 
into organizational culture.  
2019 
— In August of 2019, through the work of its Human Relations Commission, the City of Boulder passed 
Ordinance No. 8335 —the Bias-motivated Hate Crimes Ordinance— significantly expanding protections 
provided. These included enhanced prosecutorial ability and protections for religious expression covering 
religious practices by Sikhs, Muslims, Orthodox Jews and other minority groups. 
— Resolution 1275 was passed in December of 2019 as a resolution committing the City of Boulder to 
promote racial equity in city relationships, programs, services, and policies. 
— The City of Boulder conducted formal government-to-government consultations with federally recognized 
American Indian Tribal nations.  The City of Boulder respects American Indian Tribal sovereignty and 
self-determination and conducts government-to-government consultations with federally recognized 
Tribal Nations. These relationships help us in addressing the past and ongoing harm to the Indigenous 
Peoples and the land. Consultations also help us fulfill the Indigenous People’s Day Resolution and city-
tribal agreements. The city has invited the following American Indian Tribal Nations to participate in 
government-to-government consultations: 
— Apache Tribe of Oklahoma 
— Cheyenne and Arapaho 
Tribes of Oklahoma 
— Cheyenne River Sioux 
— Comanche Nation of 
Oklahoma 
— Eastern Shoshone Tribe 
— Jicarilla Apache Nation 
— Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma 
— Northern Arapaho Tribe 
— Northern Cheyenne Tribe 
— Oglala Sioux Tribe 
— Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
— Rosebud Sioux Tribe 
— Southern Ute Indian Tribe 
— Standing Rock Sioux Tribe 
— Ute Indian Tribe of the 
Uintah & Ouray Reservation 
— Ute Mountain Ute Tribes 


--- Page 16 ---
16 
Since starting this work in 2018, a core team of city employees from all levels of the organization 
have been working to normalize racial equity work through training, building leadership support 
and ensuring racial equity is the city’s highest priority. Featured activities include: 
Training 
— Advancing Racial Equity: The Role of Government (ARE) is the cornerstone workshop required of all racial 
equity core team members, supervisors, new employees, council members and is made available for 
boards, commissions, and all other city employees. The workshop introduces the role, responsibilities, and 
opportunities for government to advance racial equity. Participants gain an understanding of racial equity 
terminology, including implicit and explicit bias and individual, institutional, and structural racism. They 
gain skill at identifying and addressing institutional and structural racism and increase capacity to 
advance racial equity in the workplace. 
— Racial Equity Instrument: Intro and Best Practices is a follow up to ARE and is an opportunity to gain 
understanding and practice with the six steps of the Racial Equity Instrument. Participants learn how to 
leverage the instrument within work groups or projects to address impacts, as well as learn practices for 
assessing the development, implementation, and evaluation of programs, policies, and budgets. 
— Bias and Microaggression is currently a requirement for all city employees and is intended to be 
offered to council, advisory boards, and commissions. This training is an extension of the city’s work 
to dismantle systemic racism and inequities at various levels with a focus on the interpersonal level. 
This training engages individuals in committing to lifelong training, while learning to have courageous 
conversations about race, white supremacy culture and equity. This training was designed specifically 
for the city based on a series of focus group conversations with a local consulting team, Kebaya CIRCLE. 
Future sessions will be hosted with trained city employee equity ambassadors. 
Analysis 
— Inventory of existing efforts was conducted to understand equity efforts occurring across the city to share 
across the organization, align resources, build capacity and inform the Racial Equity Plan. 
— Community Perceptions Assessment in 2017 was utilized as a baseline of information for the Racial Equity 
Plan. 
— Historic inequities in Boulder were researched by all racial equity core team members and combined into 
the racial equity story as the introduction to the Racial Equity Plan. 
Urgency and Prioritization 
— Guiding Coalition members including: council members Mary Young, Aaron Brockett, Adam Swetlik, 
Junie Joseph, and Rachel Friend work with other city leadership, including: Interim City Manager Chris 
Meschuk, Police Chief Maris Herold, Housing and Human Services Director Kurt Firnhaber, Human 
Resources Director Jennifer Sprinkle, Director of Planning and Services Development Jacob 
Lindsey and Equity Program Manager Aimee Kane to provide leadership and oversight to the Racial Equity 
Core Team. Monthly meetings are an opportunity to learn of the core team’s advancement while also 
providing high-level strategic planning and guidance. This leverages many council members and internal 
city leadership to champion an equity focus while making decisions. 
Creating Tools 
— The Racial Equity Instrument, based on GARE’s Racial Equity Toolkit, was developed in addition to 
accompanying employee training. This six-step model actively inserts racial equity into decision making 
processes with a particular emphasis in the second step which is an opportunity to create a robust public 
engagement plan. Additionally, it includes evaluating options and developing recommendations based 
on that public input. The instrument can be helpful when used at any decision-making phase, but it has 
the most impact when used at the forefront of planning for a program, project, or budgeting process. As 
the instrument training is being rolled out several high-priority projects have been identified where the 
instrument can be piloted and modified to ensure the most effective results. 
— The Rapid Response Racial Equity Assessment was developed as part of the city’s COVID-19 
Recovery plan. This four-step process was an opportunity to embed a racial equity focus when making 
fast action decisions during the pandemic in partnership with a group of community Recovery Equity 
Connectors who can provide input into recovery efforts and ensure those most impacted by the virus are 
given the necessary guidance and resources to minimize illness and death. 
— A Racial Equity Assessment is being established and provides a platform for departments to self-
assess the status of equity work in their departments, using both qualitative and quantitative information, 
with the guidance of the Equity Assessment Team. The information gathered via the Equity Assessment 
will serve as guidance for the department to begin or continue equity work and will set the foundation for 
equity-related goal setting specific to their business unit. 


--- Page 17 ---
17 
Strategy and Planning 
— The Racial Equity Plan as guided by Council Resolution 1275 directs the city manager, in partnership 
with the community to develop a plan for delivering services in a manner that promotes racial equity 
and directs strategic actions to advance and achieve equity, including: intentional collective leadership; 
community engagement, development of equity tools and infrastructure to support and sustain systemic 
changes; and a shared accountability with metrics on progress that can be reported back to the 
community including training by city council members. 
Community, Connection and Communication 
— The Communication and Engagement Department hired the city’s first language access program 
manager, Manuela Sifuentes, in April 2020. This integral role is designed to coordinate language access 
programs and services across the city organization, further inclusive engagement strategies, and provide 
bilingual, culturally competent counsel, direction, implementation, and oversight to better support 
community members whose primary language is Spanish.  
— The Community Connectors model was established in the spring of 2018 to better meet community 
members where they are. Community Connectors strengthen the relationship between community 
and city government by partnering to serve as a trusted voice within their neighborhoods or circles. 
Community Connectors are bicultural and bilingual (e.g., English/Spanish, English/Nepali) and receive a 
stipend for their time and expertise. A few examples of Community Connector programs that specifically 
work to advance racial equity by focusing on the inclusion of voices of community members of color are 
included below: 
— Recovery Equity Connectors – Seven members who ensure that the perspectives of community 
members of color and Rapid Response Racial Equity Assessments are included in city decision-
making throughout recovery process from June 2020 through the present 
— Emergency Response Connectors – 11 Community Connectors (part of a larger team that also 
includes 23 volunteers) who build trust between community members and local government, 
sharing COVID-19 updates and public health guidelines, reaching out and navigating for basic needs 
services, and surfacing the issues and ideas of community members from March 2020 through the 
present 
— City Text Boulder - four Community Connectors who designed outreach for the city’s bilingual 
texting platform pilot, City Text Boulder, from June 2019 – April 2020 
— East Boulder Subcommunity Planning Working Group - Two Community Connectors, one of whom is 
the only resident of the East Boulder subcommunity on the Working Group, who co-design and co-
facilitate outreach and engagement opportunities for the San Lazaro, Vista Village and larger Latino 
community from May 2019 through the present 
— The Communication and Engagement team has developed several opportunities for Spanish-speaking 
community members to connect with council members. A few examples include: 
— Interpretation into Spanish of City Council meetings, including COVID-19 updates and 
presentations/public hearings on Manufactured Home Sales Ordinance, on September 1, 2020 and 
December 1, 2020. 
— Reflecting the Governor’s Stay-at-Home order, virtual Chats with Council were hosted, either 
Spanish-first (in partnership with KGNU’s Pasa La Voz) or interpreted into Spanish, on April 26, May 
13, and May 18, 2020, for community members to share about issues that matter most to them. 
— Beginning in the fall of 2018, the Engagement team partnered with Sacred Heart of Jesus Church 
to host a series of Spanish-first Conversaciones con la Ciudad, or Chats with Council, where 
congregants could raise issues or concerns important to them and their communities. This program 
is currently on hold because of the pandemic. 
— A Racial Equity web page has been created with up-to-date information about the city’s racial equity 
efforts with an option for community members to register for updates and information about the city’s 
racial equity work. 


--- Page 18 ---
18 
Racial Equity Engagement Working Group 
This Working Group consisted of seven working group members, with a majority being people of color. 
Group members had clear ties to the city and/or a demonstrated ability to work with partner organi-
zations that serve communities of color. The working group was facilitated by Magnolia Landa-Posas 
and met together for a total of six sessions from November 2019 through October 2020. 
Members of the Racial Equity Engagement Working Group included: 
— Ingrid Castro-Campos 
— Julie Schoenfeld 
— Ken Iha 
— Maria Murillo 
— Marina La Grave 
— Nikhil Mankekar 
— Dr. Sheila Davis 
The purpose of 
the Racial Equity 
Engagement 
Working Group 
was to co-design 
meaningful 
and inclusive 
engagement and 
expand the city’s outreach so that community 
members could weigh in on the draft outline of a 
City of Boulder Racial Equity Plan. 


--- Page 19 ---
19 
Community Feedback on the 
Racial Equity Plan Outline 
Community feedback on the plan was primarily collected through community partner feedback 
sessions, recommended by the Racial Equity Engagement Working Group and facilitated in-person 
or via online meetings, as well as through the city’s Be Heard Boulder online engagement platform. 
As recommended by the Racial Equity Engagement Working Group, staff primarily focused bandwidth 
and resources on ensuring that outreach specifically engaged community members of color and 
their perspectives, thoughts, and lived experience. 
Feedback Session Community Partners 
— CU Diversity and Inclusion Summit 
— Human Relations Commission 
— Latina Community Members (Spanish-first session 
co-designed with Community Connector) 
— Leadership Fellows Boulder County (Fellows and 
Alum) 
— NAACP, Boulder County 
— Nepali Community Members (co-designed with 
Community Connector and in partnership with 
Rocky Mountain Friends of Nepal and Nepal America 
Sociocultural Exchange Society) 
— Recovery Equity Connectors 
— Sabrina Sideris’ CU Class 
— ¡Suma! – part of the Boulder County Cultural Brokers 
Resilience Program 
— Youth Opportunities Advisory Board 
 Three overarching themes became clear in compiling and analyzing community feedback: 
— Resonant content 
— Need for further detail 
— Plan for accountability 
In response to the content of the Racial Equity Plan, the overwhelming reaction of community 
members was that the goals and strategies listed resonated, reflected the previously heard concerns 
of the community, and were headed in a positive direction (e.g., “everything here is on the right 
track”). While sharing the aspects of the plan that resonated most, community members in general 
also shared “some skepticism about translating good intentions into effective life-changing policy.” 
To address this, community members expressed the need for more definition and clarity around the 
timeline of the Racial Equity Plan. Including further details around each goal, as well as a defined 
timeline for what progress on the goals will be made by when. Additionally, community members 
expressed that while a plan on paper is a good start, truly successful implementation of the Racial 
Equity Plan will depend on ensuring effective accountability and evaluation towards outcomes 
identified within the plan. 
In addition to high level goals and strategies, the plan outlines action items with proposed short-
term outcomes through 2022, mid-term outcomes through 2025 and long-term outcomes through 
2030. Suggested output data accompany the individual activities. 


--- Page 20 ---
20 
Planning Timeframe and Tracking Progress 
The time horizon for the Racial Equity Plan is three years. Progress will be reported by staff and 
reviewed annually by City Council with the opportunity for possible amendments to the plan to 
reflect changes in circumstances and community desires every three years. 
The Racial Equity Plan describes goals and strategies for staff, boards, City Council, as well as coordina-
tion with the community and partners to advance racial equity. This will be done by ensuring that the City of 
Boulder’s policies, programs, and practices are free from institutional and systemic racism and support a high 
quality of life and access to opportunity for community members of all races and ethnicities.  
We heard from the community that this Racial Equity Plan is only as good as the accountability mecha-
nisms that demand tangible progress. To honor  this feedback, as well as the importance of these goals and 
strategies, staff will report annually on progress, showing the degree to which staff have advanced strategies 
and achieved outcomes, as detailed below.  
Within the logic model, each outcome includes a measurable output. Many of these outputs are unable to 
include specific figures, as the city simply does not yet have accurate baseline data. As reflected elsewhere in 
the logic model, collecting this baseline data is a top priority. Outcomes will also be measured in results from 
staff racial equity training assessments, as well as the city’s biannual Community Survey, especially in re-
sponse to prompts (e.g., “I feel included in the Boulder community”) where results will be disaggregated by race 
and analyzed by trends over time.  
Recognizing the need to measure outcomes quantitatively (e.g., numbers, figures) and qualitatively (e.g., 
experiences, narrative), staff also plan to co-design and co-host a series of focus group listening sessions 
with community members of color. The goal of these annual sessions will be to hear more about the lived 
experience of community members of color, as well as the impacts of the city’s work to advance racial equity. 
Additionally, many outcomes will be further developed through departmental racial equity plans. Supporting 
departments in identifying specific measurements will lead to outputs that are more measurable, realistic, and 
accurate.  
As staff track and communicate our status, we will also gather input from the community to determine the 
effectiveness of programs and projects that advance Racial Equity Plan strategies and outcomes. City staff 
also plan to provide an update to City Council each year. This update will include progress on outcomes (mea-
sured against outputs where possible), how racial equity priorities determined budget decisions, challenges 
faced, and accomplishments of the city’s work in continuing to advance racial equity. Proposed next steps and 
adjustments to short-term, mid-term and long-term outcomes in response to City Council feedback may also 
be included. Updates will be publicly available through an information packet written for council, an oral pre-
sentation given to council, and a series of digestible mediums for community members, such as videos, brief 
online or printed overviews, community gatherings, etc. 
As we move forward over the next three years, this living plan will continue to reflect the 
community’s goals well into the future, and City Council will have annual opportunities to 
review and discuss progress. After three years, the plan will be updated to reflect changes in 
circumstances, community desires and new priorities. 


--- Page 21 ---
21 
Goals and Strategies 
Goal 1  — Everybody gets it. 
The city will normalize and operationalize understanding of institutional and structural 
racism among people who work for or represent the City of Boulder, including city staff, 
City Council, Boards and Commissions, and ongoing program volunteers. 
Strategy 1.1: Develop equity-focused leadership at all levels 
— Leverage the Guiding Coalition to ensure racial equity is embedded in council priorities. 
— Develop expectation across work groups to participate on Racial Equity Teams. 
Strategy 1.2: Develop workplace-based equity teams 
— Organize Racial Equity Teams responsible for leading implementation of the Action Plans within their 
respective departments. 
Strategy 1.3: Provide Racial Equity Training 
— Provide introductory Racial Equity Training to all employees.  
— In the Racial Equity Training, use a “train-the-trainer” model to continue to build internal expertise.  
Provide Racial Equity Toolkit training to all managers. Provide training on communications and messaging 
about racial equity to appropriate staff.  
— Make Implicit Bias and Microaggression training mandatory for staff, council, boards, commissions, and 
volunteers. 
— Provide New Employee Orientation (NEO) that grounds new staff members in our organizational culture 
and what the city is working towards. 
— Make the Advancing Racial Equity: The Role of Government training mandatory for all supervisors and 
available for all staff members.  
— Make Using a Racial Equity Instrument training available for all staff members (Advancing Racial Equity: 
The Role of Government is prerequisite) 
— Provide opportunities for staff to engage in meaningful conversations about race. 
— Establish clear racial equity expectation language and implement in handbooks, scopes of work, RFPs, 
and contracts. 


--- Page 22 ---
22 
Goal 2  — Justly do it. 
The city will take action to end racial disparities in city services. 
Strategy 2.1: Achieve commitment at the department level 
— Departments will create their own Racial Equity Teams and Plans (identify areas of exploration to analyze, 
the plan to prioritize that work, instrument applied to anything new). 
Strategy 2.2: Operationalize the Racial Equity Instrument 
— Utilize the Racial Equity Instrument into new city programs and policies. 
— Weave the Racial Equity Instrument into the city’s decision-making process. 
— Strategically integrate the Racial Equity Instrument into the city’s existing programs, policies and budgets. 
Strategy 2.3: Integrate racial equity into master and strategic Plans 
— Ensure consideration of racial equity is incorporated into the development of new master and strategic 
plans. 
— Include Racial Equity Instrument in the city’s proposed planning toolkits. 
Strategy 2.4: Focus on racial equity in stewarding public funds, racial equity programming and city 
financial processes  
— Utilize the Racial Equity Instrument into budget, purchasing and procurement processes. 
— Expand Minority-Owned Business policy beyond federal grants. 
— Ensure broader accessibility of city financial processes, including grants, RFPs, taxes, and other processes.  
Goal 3  — Community Commitment. 
The city will strengthen partnerships and collaborate with community members and 
organizations that demonstrate a commitment to ending racism. 
Strategy 3.1: Partner with community 
— Identify organizations and community members interested in partnership and work together to establish 
ways we can coordinate, collaborate, and complement each other’s work. 
— Leverage council members in outreach and engagement within the community. 
Strategy 3.2: Build community organizational capacity 
— Improve relationships between organizations focusing on advancing racial equity, establish mutually 
beneficial best practices for communications and areas of collaboration. 
Strategy 3.3: Seek opportunities to support and promote the value of diversity and multiculturalism 
Strategy 3.4: Recognize history of institutional racism within the City of Boulder 
— Model changes in systems and structures that may guide other organizations in implementing similar 
changes. 
— Incorporate history of institutional racism and past lessons learned into staff training and decision-making 
processes. 
— Ensure broader accessibility of city financial processes, including grants, RFPs, taxes, and other processes.  


--- Page 23 ---
23 
Goal 4  — Power to all people. 
The city will build and maintain trust, expanding the influence of community members 
of color through inclusive and responsive engagement. 
Strategy 4.1: Improve access to decision-makers 
— Identify and address structural inequities in access to council/decision makers.  
Strategy 4.2: Support city-community relationships through staffing 
— Build trust and ensure staff has the responsibility, skills, and cultural proficiency to establish lasting 
relationships.  
Strategy 4.3: Focus on high-quality community engagement 
— Develop, share, and incorporate best practices and resources to support accessible, inclusive, and 
welcoming engagement. 
— Create collaborative opportunities to plan and implement engagement with people of color. 
Strategy 4.4: Value lived experience 
— Listen and be responsive to community needs and recognize the value of lived experiences, assets, and 
strengths within communities of color. 
Strategy 4.5: Address language, cultural and engagement access barriers  
— Increase strategic use of interpretation and translation services as well as facilitation in languages other 
than English. 
— Further develop and encourage the use of resources and tactics designed to meet community members 
where they are (e.g., Community Connectors, micro-engagements).  
Goal 5  — Representation matters. 
The city will eliminate barriers and create opportunities to build a diverse workforce 
across the depth and breadth of local government including elected officials, boards, 
commissions and working groups. 
Strategy 5.1: Address boards, commissions and working groups 
— Collect the demographic data of boards, commissions and working groups. 
— Revamp application process, including forms, to support increased inclusivity. 
— Ensure outreach and recruitment processes support and encourage racial equity. 
— Identify and mitigate barriers in the operations of board, commission and working group meetings (times 
of day, frequency, locations, days of the week, etc.). 
Strategy 5.2: Develop City of Boulder’s workforce 
Hiring 
— Expand outreach opportunities to attract a more diverse applicant pool. 
— Integrate racial demographics into screening matrix. 
Recruitment 
— Evaluate new and existing position descriptions to reduce barriers to access (e.g., higher education, 
professional associations). 
Retention 
— Create support structures for employee racial and ethnic affinity groups. 
— Explore and implement compensation for language skills. 


--- Page 24 ---
24 
Short Term Outcomes 
What 
to expect 
in 2022 
City leadership 
and employees at 
all levels increase 
awareness, 
knowledge and 
shared commitment 
to anti-racism. 
Growing city staff and leaders’ 
understanding and capacity for, and action 
to promote and achieve racial equity 
Conduct equity trainings 
City staff understand 
and increasingly 
utilize racial equity 
assessment tools 
and instruments for 
decision making. 
Collect and analyze 
meaningful data
City staff collect 
relevant data, 
coordinate 
data systems to 
understand and track 
needs and impacts. 
Create, modify and use 
equity tools, instruments 
and assessments 
Powering continuous, increased level and 
rate of improvement by integrating racial 
equity data into our decision processes 
Collect and analyze 
meaningful data 
Slow down. 
Change happens 
at the speed of 
trust. 
Complete inventory 
of barriers for 
communities of 
color to publicly 
participate. Pilot 
co-design of new 
inclusive engagement 
opportunities. 
Increasing empowerment and efficacy of people of 
color community members for engagement in city 
program and process decision making 
Prioritize inclusive 
community engagement 
...how to be “seen” 
when for years POC 
were not seen. 
City Council normalizes 
the use of resolutions and 
declarations in alignment with 
the Racial Equity Plan. Staff 
and community members 
increasingly understand 
the purpose and function of 
resolutions and declarations. 
Use resolutions 
and declarations to 
prioritize, elevate and 
evaluate racial equity 
The City of Boulder will use a logic model as one tool to maintain accountability 
and measure the impact of our efforts. The following are some of the short term 
outcomes and some of the feedback that helped shape this plan. 
Training would 
be effective  
How will you collect 
evidence the tool is 
being used by ALL 
departments with 
fidelity? 
weave equity into 
ALL city’s decision 
processes 


--- Page 25 ---
25 
Understand and inventory 
the racial equity work 
being done by our 
institutional partners to 
be aware of, and continue 
support and expansion of 
coordinated efforts. 
The participation 
between the government 
and the agencies and 
organizations... should 
increase. 
Understand and inventory 
the racial equity work 
being done by our 
institutional partners to 
be aware of, and continue 
support and expansion of 
coordinated efforts. 
...find ways to pay people 
and organizations for 
their consultation and 
involvement. 
Racial Equity Teams 
need to be the leaders 
that guide everybody. 
Each city department 
has in place a Justice, 
Equity, Diversity and 
Inclusion (JEDI) Team. 
Seeing more 
cultural managers in 
important positions or 
jobs, that will help our 
community a lot. 
Establish diversification 
goals. Application 
of the Racial Equity 
Instrument to 
city workforce HR 
processes. 
Very important 
that money is being 
dedicated towards 
these initiatives. 
Increase use of Racial 
Equity Instrument (REI) 
and Rapid Response 
Equity Assessment 
(RREA) to assess and 
improve key investment 
programs. 
Collaborate with 
institutional partners 
2022 
Engage in GARE Network 
and other professional 
groups committed to 
advancing equity 
Implement 
departmental and 
citywide equity 
policies 
Prioritize a diverse and 
inclusive workforce 
Infuse equity in city 
investments 


--- Page 26 ---
26 
y/
Conduct Equity Trainings 
City leadership and employees at all levels 
increase awareness, knowledge, shared 
commitment to anti-racism. 
City staff retain knowledge from 
trainings; increasingly utilize trainings to 
change institutional habits, processes, 
decisions. 
City staff routinely evaluate, modify, add 
to training offerings to reinforce and build 
racial equity capacity at all levels. 
Advancing Racial Equity: The 
Role of Government 
All supervisors (#s) by 12.31.20; 40% total 
staff. 80% of trained staff report increased 
understanding of RE. All new staff 
participate as part of NEO.
All boards & commissions and city staff 
participate in Advancing Racial Equity: 
The Role of Government 
Improved knowledge of racial equity 
concepts among employees and 
leaderships through feedback from 
employee engagement surveys
Number of trainings held, number of 
participants and staff levels trained, trends 
by survey responses, staff exit interviews 
Racial Equity Instrument 
Increase in training participation by offering 
at least 4 trainings with 30 participant 
capacity. 5 case studies on how Instrument 
was used in decision making process 
Continue to host trainings for new staff 
and evaluate usefulness. 
Racial equity is integrated regularly into 
routine operations and budgets 
Number of trainings held, number of 
participants and staff levels trained, trends 
by survey responses 
Bias & Microaggression 
All city staff participate in Bias and 
Microaggression Training by end of 2022 
Improved employee engagement and a 
reduction in the number of employees 
of color leaving the city 
Improved knowledge of racial equity 
concepts among employees and 
leaderships through feedback from 
employee engagement surveys 
Number of trainings held, number of 
participants and staff levels trained, trends 
by survey responses, staff exit interviews 
Create, modify, use equity 
tools, instruments, 
assessments 
City staff understand and increasingly 
utilize racial equity assessment tools and 
instruments for decision making. 
City staff utilize racial equity 
assessment tools in all budget and 
Master Plan processes. Council, Boards, 
Committees, Commissions increasingly 
understand and utilize assessment 
tools
City staff, City Council, Boards, 
Committees and Commissions utilize racial 
equity assessment tools in all decision 
making processes. 
Racial Equity Instrument 
Increase in training participation by offering 
at least 4 trainings with 30 participant 
capacity. 5 case studies on how Instrument 
was used in decision making process 
City council regularly utilizes the Racial 
Equity Instrument when establishing 
organizational priorities and 
implemented initiation of any new 
projects that go to council. 
Utilization of the racial equity instrument 
as part of all Master and Strategic planning 
processes 
Standardized racial equity performance 
metric tracking across all departments, 
incorporated into department-level Master 
and Strategic Plans and tracked as part of 
unified cross-department reporting 
Rapid Response Equity 
Assessment 
Each recovery team implements the 
assessment for half of their decisions. 
Baseline established for utilization Rapid 
Response Racial Equity Assessment in 
budgeting processes. Include use of the 
assessment in relation to any emergency 
situations that arise. 
All continuing recovery team decisions 
will use the assessment. Rapid 
Response Racial Equity Assessment 
used in all budgeting processes; 
including dashboard to allow for 
Executive budget decision making 
across departments. Continue to use 
the assessment in relation to any 
emergency situations that arise. 
Continue to refine assessment as needed. 
Standardized reporting of % contribution of 
project/programs toward overall city 
budgetary commitment to improving racial 
equity within the staff and within the 
community; incorporate % change per year 
(ROI) per department-level Master Plan 
Goals 
Departmental Equity 
Assessment Tool 
Completion of development of the 
assessment tool (for individuals and 
workgroups) by Q1 2021. Assessment 
facilitated by Pilot JEDI teams to pilot 
departments by Q3 2021 and updated 
based on feedback by Q4 2021. Begin roll 
out of assessment tool to additional 
departments with JEDI teams by end of 
2022. 
Completion of the racial equity 
assessment tool by 50% of individuals 
and 50% of workgroups within their 
department and identification of where 
departmental equity policies need to be 
solidified and areas in which there are 
gaps. 
All departments complete RE assessment 
tool every 2 years to evaluate progress and 
inform the modification, updating and 
continued improvement of departmental 
plans to continue progress and alignment 
with the citywide RE Plan outcomes. 
Standardized reporting of trends from 
assessment tool results, by department with 
reference to citywide RE Plan outcomes 
(e.g., % contribution, growth trajectory, 
types of concerns, %resources considered, 
%polices evaluated and refined) 
Collect and analyze 
meaningful data 
City staff collect relevant data, coordinate 
data systems to understand and track 
needs and impacts. 
City staff consolidate data, increasingly 
use analysis tools to more deeply 
identify racial equity trends. 
Increasingly communicating data 
publicly in an easy to understand 
manner. 
City staff, Council, Boards, Committees 
and Commissions routinely evaluate, 
modify, improve upon data systems and 
data utilization. Staff routinely use data in 
community engagement processes. 
Recognize who we serve 
(community data on 
residents, workforce, 
university students, visitors) 
= store in organized, 
accessible data repository 
Collect and make accessible unified 
demographic and prosperity data (e.g., 
economic, health, safety) on our 
residential, workforce, university affiliates, 
and visitors [for consistent impact analysis 
support] 
All departments develop and share RE 
analysis methodology, as well as results 
from annual impact assessments 
(progress toward Master Plan RE goals); 
link all analyses to master data story 
hub (Open Data Portal) 
Support interactive RE data platform (raw 
and analyzed) to empower leadership to 
routinely incorporate RE data and impact 
results (e.g., community-level RE FitBit) 
into normal strategic conversations and 
community sharing work 
% departments with explicit RE goals 
(related to city-wide efforts), % departments 
with logged RE analysis methodology, % 
departments completing annual impact 
analysis, % departments with RE reporting 
on Open Data Portal, % departments 
contributing to interactive data platform 
Demonstrate substantive 
commitment to 
representation within staff at 
all levels 
Collect and make accessible demographic 
data on all staff, by department and 
function [for consistent impact analysis 
support] 
All departments report annually as part 
of Master Plan progress tracking on 
representation within department 
All departments complete and report on 
changing composition of staff, by role and 
level of responsibility (transparency) 
% departments consistently reporting on RE 
by role/responsibility level, % departments 
recognizing changing composition (and 
drivers) 
Develop accessible 'data 
stories' that explain where 
we are at, what we are 
learning and trying, and 
where we are going 
Develop and publicly socialize/share 
qualitative and quantitative indicators of 
degree of RE over space and time 
Cross-department collaboration on 
unified presentation of RE outcome 
objectives (by responsibility) and 
progress tracking; unified vision = 
unified communication 
All departments provide multi-year view 
on RE goals and achieved outcomes  with 
specific link to explicit RE outcomes within 
Master Plan and other strategic planning 
work; recommend interactive web-hosted 
data sharing tools to facilitate leadership 
and community conversations and 
feedback 
% departments with explicit RE 'data stories' 
designed to share growth journey, % 
departments with qualitative/quantitative 
indicators of RE relevant to service area, % 
departments participating in unified 
presentation efforts of RE efforts across city, 
% contribution to interactive data sharing 
platform, % time dedicated to RE reflections 
during leadership and community
Use resolutions and 
declarations to prioritize, 
elevate and evaluate racial 
equity 
City Council normalizes the use of 
resolutions and declarations in alignment 
with the Racial Equity Plan. Staff and 
community members increasingly 
understand the purpose and function of 
resolutions and declarations. 
City Council and Staff increasingly utilize 
resolutions and declarations to 
establish and reinforce racial equity 
accountability. Resolutions and 
declarations are increasingly designed 
with early input from community 
members experiencing racial burdens. 
All resolutions are rooted in, and contain 
racial equity-based language and 
actionable elements. Declarations are 
increasingly designed and approved with 
application of a racial equity focus. 
Pass resolutions and 
declarations to engage City 
Council in advancing racial 
equity, boosting 
accountability 
City council passes the first slate of racial 
equity resolutions, including a resolution 
for the city to promote racial equity in city 
relationships, programs, services and 
policies; and a resolution declaring racism a 
public health risk. Issue other resolutions 
and declarations as opportunities arise. 
Pass additional racial-equity resolutions 
as opportunities arise. Evaluate and 
develop accountability infrastructure for 
reviewing past resolutions. 
Develop a robust resolution process that 
incorporates racial equity in all 
resolutions. 
Publicly formalizing the city's 
commitments to racial equity 
for increased community 
knowledge and engagement, 
and to increase city 
accountability to advance racial 
equity 
Ensure consistent use of 
racial equity focus in city 
resolutions and declarations 
Staff will ensure that other resolutions are 
consistent with prior racial equity 
resolutions. 
Staff engages impacted community 
members to receive input and ideas for 
resolutions. 
Staff and city council members engage in 
evaluation of racial equity impact of 
resolutions and declarations 
Growing city staff and leaders' 
understanding and capacity for, 
and action to promote and 
achieve racial equity 
Standardizing assessment and 
reporting methods for use of 
racial equity tools: establishing 
norms on analysis, reporting, 
and continuous monitoring for 
improvement. 
Powering continuous, 
increased level and rate of 
improvement by integrating 
racial equity data into our 
decision processes 
Full Logic Model 
HIGHER-LEVEL 
STATEMENT OR  
PURPOSE FOR 
THE ACTIVITY/ 
OUTCOMES 
OUTPUT DATA 
LONG-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2030) 
MID-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2025) 
SHORT-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2022) 
ACTIVITIES 


--- Page 27 ---
27 
Evaluate racial equity impact 
of resolutions and 
declarations 
Staff and City Council will begin to develop 
resolution review and evaluation process. 
Staff utilize the racial equity instrument 
on all resolutions, and ensure that 
resolutions are consistent with the city's 
racial equity goals. 
Staff develops evaluation metrics to 
measure the impact of racial equity 
resolutions and addresses successes or 
shortcomings in new resolutions. 
Implement departmental 
and citywide equity policies 
Each city department has in place a Justice, 
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (JEDI) Team. 
JEDI Teams complete departmental 
equity assessment to inform specific 
department equity plans. Plans are 
implemented, communicated citywide, 
and include community engagement as 
needed. 
All city departments routinely assess, 
modify and improve racial equity plans to 
maintain alignment with the citywide 
Racial Equity Plan outcomes. 
Development of Department 
Equity teams 
JEDI teams for 3 pilot departments will be 
developed by Q2 2021. Pilot JEDI teams in 
coordination with citywide RE facilitators 
will facilitate completion of the racial equity 
assessment tool to individuals and 
workgroups within their department by 
end of 2021. Staff from all city departments 
will have been informed about and 
supported in the use of the RE Department 
Teams Toolkit to begin recruitment and 
selection of members for their 
departmental JEDI team by the end of
All departmental JEDI teams have 
facilitated the completion of the racial 
equity assessment tool by 50% of 
individuals and 50% of workgroups 
within their department by 2025 and 
identified where departmental equity 
policies need to be solidified and areas 
in which there are gaps. 
All departments will have JEDI teams 
which have completed at least one full 
round of the Assessment Tool. JEDI teams 
will facilitate completion of the RE 
assessment tool every 2 years to evaluate 
progress and inform the development, 
modification, updating and continued 
improvement of departmental plans to 
continue progress and alignment with the 
citywide RE Plan outcomes. 
# of formed deparmental equity teams. # of 
completed departmental equity plans. 
Trends by assessment tool data and 
departmental plans. 
Department policy review, 
updates and development 
Inventory of all departments' policies will 
be complete by end of 2022 for all 
departments with a JEDI team. 
Use racial equity instrument to identify 
and begin to remove bias and develop 
new departmental policies to advance 
racial equity and change departmental 
habits, processes and decision-making. 
All departmental policies include a focus 
on equity and are consistently reviewed 
for gaps using equity assessment tools. 
City staff routinely evaluate, modify, and 
add to departmental policies to reinforce 
and build racial equity at all levels. 
Trends by assessment tool data (staff and 
community feedback). %s of diverse staff, 
boards, commission members hired and 
retained, etc. Policies tie into all the other 
aspects/outputs listed... 
Ensuring that city racial equity 
goals, policies and practices are 
manifest at every departmental 
level of the city institution.
Citywide policy review, 
updates and development 
Inventory of all citywide policies will be 
complete by end of 2022. 
Use racial equity instrument to identify 
and begin to remove bias and develop 
new citywide policies to advance racial 
equity and change citywide habits, 
processes and decision-making. 
All citywide policies include a focus on 
equity and are consistently reviewed for 
gaps using equity assessment tools. City 
staff routinely evaluate, modify, add to 
citywide policies to reinforce and build 
racial equity at all levels. 
Trends by assessment tool data (staff and 
community feedback). %s of diverse staff, 
boards, commission members hired and 
retained, etc. Policies tie into all the other 
aspects/outputs listed... 
Departmental RE Plans 
N/A yet. This will follow results from Equity 
Assessment tool. 
Pilot JEDI teams have developed 
departmental equity plans (that are in 
alignment with the citywide RE Plan) to 
address identified departmental gaps 
based on results from the equity 
assessment tool by the end of 2025. 
All departments have developed equity 
plans (that are in alignment with the 
citywide RE Plan) to address identified 
departmental gaps based on results from 
the equity assessment tool. 
Implementation of all department plans is 
occuring by 2030 and being communicated 
city and community wide
Departmental equity plans 
Guiding Coalition 
Leadership support of embedding racial 
equity work in departmental work plans 
Utilization of prioritization tools and 
community input in determining equity 
impacts of policy decisions 
All guiding coalition members demonstrate 
an in depth understanding of city's RE 
practices, tools and instruments and 
consistently advocate for advancing equity 
in all policy decisions 
Feedback from Guiding Coalition team 
members 
Embed a committment to 
advancing racial equity in 
citywide master and strategic 
plans 
Focus on equity is embedded in the Pilot 
Departmental Master Planning & Strategic 
Planning Guide 
City department master and strategic 
plans participate in an Equity 
Assessment to establish areas of equity 
focus and align with work plans 
Specific  goals are set and in all master and 
strategic plans with appropriate funding 
resources allocated. 
# and departmental master and strategic 
plans with accompanying workplan items 
focused on advancing racial equity 
Individual RE Plans 
Develop and finalize individual RE Plan 
expectations. 
Individual RE Plans are embedded in 
annual work plans and evaluations. XX% 
of staff show improvement towards 
individual RE plan goals. 
Specific annual goals are set and we'll 
continue to refine and improve process as 
needed. 
# and % of individual staff members who 
meet or exceed RE Plan goals  Data by race, 
gender to see who has completed 
plans/made progress 
Engage in GARE Network and 
other professional groups 
committed to advancing 
equity (National League of 
Cities, National Association 
for Civilian Oversight in Law 
Enforcement, International
Identify city staff liaisons to GARE. 
Coordinate dissemination of GARE 
information to RE Core Team members and 
other city staff. 
Expand and deepen participatation in 
GARE. Evaluate and identify additional 
partnerships/learning opportunities 
within GARE. 
Be the leaders in equity and connect with 
regional partners (other local GARE 
members such as Boulder County, Denver, 
Etc) in these efforts. 
Participation in network calls, 
issue groups 
Racial Equity Core Team members display 
and convey an understanding on what is 
happening in other jurisdictions; city 
supervisors don't view staff racial equity 
contributions as an 'add' on to their work, 
but rather part of their work 
City staff outside of Racial Equity Core 
Team utilize the GARE portal and 
participate in specific topic groups 
related to their work 
City staff continue to build capacity and 
bring forth ideas to advance racial equity 
in departmental work planning 
Number of city staff who regularly 
participate in network calls, issue groups 
Fostering and reinforcing a 
culture and practice of learning 
and collaboration with state, 
regional, national and 
international racial equity 
partners 
Participation in regional, 
national meetings 
Racial Equity Core Team members have the 
opportunity to build capacity and bring 
back learning to core team members and 
other city staff 
Other city staff have the opportunity to 
attend regional and national meetings 
in order to build capacity and 
implement learning into own work plan 
City staff continue to build capacity and 
bring forth ideas to advance racial equity 
in departmental work planning 
Number of city staff who regularly 
participate in meetings and present 
innovative ways of advancing racial equity to 
colleagues and leadership 
Presentations to GARE 
Racial Equity Core Team Members 
represent city equity work to other GARE 
members in an effort to advance equity at 
a systemic level 
Racial Equity Core Team members build 
skills and leadership in presenting on 
racial equity best practices 
City of Boulder staff are seen as leaders 
and models in advancing racial equity on a 
larger systemic scale 
Feedback from city staff and other agencies 
who reach out for more information on city 
programs, policies and decisions 
Collaborate with 
institutional partners 
Understand and inventory the racial equity 
work being done by our institutional 
partners to be aware of, and continue 
support and expansion of coordinated 
efforts. 
Improve Integration and collaboration 
with partners in a more formalized 
manner including increased/clearly 
defined leadership to advance racial 
equity efforts and better serve other 
marginalized communities through 
shared outcomes. 
Using a clearly defined system and 
formalized agreements around a focus on 
racial equity and other marginalized 
communities, collaborate with 
institutional partners around shared 
metrics in a cohesive way with shared 
accountability and transparency. 
CU and Naropa 
Baseline established of number of students 
of color participating in public meetings and 
applying for staff positions 
Increase % of student participation in 
public meetings and applying for staff 
positions;host commuity conversations 
on racial equity
Students remain in the city of Boulder post 
graduation for 5 years 
Data collected through surveys with 
students; participation rates of students 
participating in public meetings 
Community Foundations 
Work with other institutions and advocacy 
groups to identify, align, and implement 
strategies for advancing racial equity 
Create shared calendar for equity 
related events; host commuity 
conversations on racial equity 
Regularly host equity related events with 
partner organizations 
Data collected through community surveys 
HIGHER-LEVEL 
STATEMENT OR 
PURPOSE FOR 
THE ACTIVITY/ 
OUTCOMES 
OUTPUT DATA
LONG-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2030) 
MID-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2025) 
SHORT-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2022) 
ACTIVITIES 


--- Page 28 ---
28 
CU and Naropa 
of color participating in public meetings and 
applying for staff positions 
p
g
pp y g
positions;host commuity conversations 
on racial equity
y
p
graduation for 5 years 
students; participation rates of students 
participating in public meetings 
Community Foundations 
Work with other institutions and advocacy 
groups to identify, align, and implement 
strategies for advancing racial equity 
Create shared calendar for equity 
related events; host commuity 
conversations on racial equity 
Regularly host equity related events with 
partner organizations 
Data collected through community surveys 
Local government partners 
Partner with other agencies in sharing 
training, tools and resources; participate in 
partner equity initiatives and act as the 
convener when appropriate 
Racial equity initiatves begin to be 
integrated into regional plans 
Regularly host equity related events with 
partner organizations 
Strengthening partnerships and 
collaboration wtih community 
members and organizations 
that demonstrate a 
commitment to ending racism, 
for better community-wide
Non-profit community 
partners 
Work with other institutions and advocacy 
groups to identify, align, and implement 
strategies for advancing racial equity 
Implement equity-focused partnerships, 
evaluate partnerships together on an 
annual basis and apply lessons learned 
to future partnership work; host 
commuity conversations on racial equity 
Regularly host equity related events with 
partner organizations 
Data collected through community surveys 
Prioritize inclusive 
community engagement 
Complete inventory of barriers for 
communities of color to publicly 
participate. Pilot co-design of new inclusive 
engagement opportunities. Ensure 
alignment of Engagement Strategic 
Framework and trainings with RE Plan. 
Expand and systemitize our co-design 
of inclusive engagement opportunities. 
Increase the inclusivity of entire 
engagement processes  from beginning 
to end. 
Reflecting full and consistent use of the 
Engagement Strategic Framework, all city 
engagement opportunities are open and 
inclusive to all community members. 
# of participants, % of participation by 
historicallly excluded community members, 
number of engagement opportunties  co-
designed with community members of color, 
response on biennial City of Boulder 
Community Survey 
Public comm with Council, 
City manager 
Pilot inclusive engagement opportunities 
for council meetings (could be during 
meetings or a process outside set meetings, 
such as Conversaciones con la Ciudad). 
Institutionalize inclusive practices for 
council meetings. 
On-going assessment and strengthening of 
inclusive practices. 
# of participants, % of participation by 
historically excluded community members 
Community Connectors 
Community Connectors are engaged 
through several project-based, long-term, 
and work group processes. Situationally-
effective practices are identified and shared 
with organization. 
Community Connectors are 
institutionalized into working group 
processes. Integration into project-
based and long-term processes is 
expanded. Situationally-effective 
practices are identified, updated, and 
shared. 
Situationally-effective practices are 
continually identified, updated, and 
shared. 
# of projects and working group processes, 
effective integration of feedback into 
engagement processes 
Boards, Commissions, 
Committees 
100 % of board /commission members 
complete implicit bias and RE core training. 
Identification of barriers to participation for 
community members of color. 
100% of working group members 
complete implicit bias and RE core 
training. 100% of incoming 
board/commission memebrs complete 
implicit and RE core training. Increase 
racial or ethnic diversity of board and 
commission members. 
On-going assessment and improvement of 
accessibility, support, and training. 
Increase in # of board / commission / 
working group members of color. 
Increasing empowerment and 
efficacy of people of color 
community members for 
engagement in city program 
and process decision making, 
through increased, sustained 
level of equitable engagement 
Language access 
Draft and share with community an initial 
Language Access Strategic Plan. 
Threshholds are identified for translating 
documents/webpages and interpreting 
engagement opportunities. 
Institutionalize language access for 
specific 
documents/webpages/engagement 
opportunities. Evaluate ongoing 
language access needs of community. 
Evaluate ongoing language access needs of 
community. 
# of community members engaging in 
interpreted/translated/native content or 
engagement opportunities. 
Engagement Opportunities 
Pilot inclusive engagement opportunities 
for short-term and long-term projects or 
processes. Develop resources, best 
practices, and additional trainings for staff. 
Institutionalize inclusive practices for 
engagement opportunities. 
Continue to identify, refine, and update 
inclusive engagement practices as needed. 
# of participants, % of participation by 
historically excluded community members 
Infuse equity in city 
investments 
Increase use of Racial Equity Instrument 
(REI) and Rapid Response Equity 
Assessment (RREA) to assess and improve 
key investment programs. 
Increase use of Racial Equity Instrument 
and Rapid Response Equity Assessment. 
Develop citywide process to routinely 
evaluate and track racial equity impacts 
from investment programs. Increased 
equitable funding, contracting. 
Racial equity assessments are incoporated 
into all city  investment processes. City 
staff routinely track and publicy report 
racial equity impacts resulting from city 
investments.  City investments are 
commensurate with ongoing needs of 
people of color community members. 
Community Investments (i.e. 
grant programs, contracts to 
non-profits) 
Complete Racial Equity Instrument 
assessments on at least three grant or 
funding programs. 
Complete REI on all grant/funding 
programs, per program and as a whole 
regarding funding directives and impact. 
Increase use of outcome/impact 
evaluation for departmental and 
citywide racial equity improvements. 
Increase funding for POC-led, POC-
served agencies
Sustained higher, or increased diversity of 
grant contracts. Increased long-term 
stability of POC-led agencies, services. 
# of assessment completed. # of dollars 
allocated, attributed to POC-led, POC-served 
agencies. 
Procurement 
Identify procurement processes to which 
the assessment instruments could be 
applied 
Increase use of REI and RREA. Develop 
citywide process to routinely evaluate 
and track racial equity impacts from 
investment programs. Increased 
outreach to, contracts to POC-led 
businesses. 
Increased diversity of contractors, 
consultants, by percentage of the total city 
contractors and consultants and within 
types of procurement. 
# of contracts awarded. # of bids submitted, 
contracts awarded to POC and other 
underrepresented groups 
Investing in increased quality of 
life, resilience and inclusion of 
people of color and people of 
color-led agencies and 
businesses, through a wide 
range of budget, procurement 
and funding programs 
Allocate appropriate funding 
to equity programs, including 
money allocated for staffing 
and supporting programs 
Financial resources are allocated to ensure 
appropriate staffing and resources for 
Citywide Racial Equity Program 
Financial resources are allocated to 
ensure appropriate staff and resources 
for departmental initiatives; specific line 
times in department budgets dedicated 
to equity work 
Citywide dollars routinely assessed and 
allocated to support new opportunities for 
initiatives to address racial equity 
# of dollars allocated, attributed to racial 
equity work, POC-benefit activities, 
programs and services 
Budget processes 
(departments, city-wide) 
[add council language] 
Evaluate impact of RREA on the 2021 
budget process. Complete a REI for the 
citywide 2022 budget process. 
Use REI in combination with data 
analysis tools and community 
engagement to improve strategic 
investment decision making processes. 
Increase budget allocation for 
programs, services to POC. 
Incremental, annual increase of 
department program budgets/citywide 
budget attributed to relieving racial equity. 
# of dollars allocated, attributed to racial 
equity work, POC-benefit activities, 
programs and services 
New investment initiatives 
Staff will capture insights and ideas for 
meeting community needs, related to 
COVID19 and other disparities; best new 
ideas for addressing income, other 
disparities.
Staff will asess potential revised or new 
investment policies and projects to 
advance racial equity. 
Staff will implement and routinely assess 
new opportunities for initiatives to 
address racial equity 
# and nature of new investment initiatives. 
l 
HIGHER-LEVEL 
STATEMENT OR 
PURPOSE FOR 
THE ACTIVITY/ 
OUTCOMES 
OUTPUT DATA 
LONG-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2030) 
MID-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2025) 
SHORT-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2022) 
ACTIVITIES 


--- Page 29 ---
29 
p
Prioritize a diverse and 
inclusive workforce 
Establish diversification goals. Application 
of the RE Instrument to city workforce HR 
processes.
Establish and implement recruitment 
and retention strategies 
Our city workforce and leadership meets 
or exceeds the racial diversity reflected in 
our community.
City workforce recruitment 
Establish baseline for the number of 
qualified people of color, including women 
of color, hired by the city. Review and 
update hiring policies to prevent bias in 
recruitment and hiring strategies, including 
ensuring that recruitment is not based on 
quotas alone. 
10% increase in number of people of 
color, including women of color, hired 
into leadership positions within the city 
10% increase in number of people of color, 
including women of color, hired into 
leadership positions in the city 
Employee demographic data and employee 
engagement surveys 
City staff retention 
100% of hiring managers trained on Bias 
and hiring; baseline established of number 
of employees of color leaving the city; 
baseline understanding about the reasons 
for which employees of color leave the city. 
Incremental annual decrease of 
employees of color leaving the city 
(excluding employees retiring). 
Managers receive guidance on 
supporting, retaining employees of 
color.
10% increase in number of people of color, 
including women of colored in leadership 
positions in the city 
Employee demographic data and employee 
engagement surveys 
Eliminate barriers and create 
opportunities to build a diverse 
workforce and volunteer base --
including elected officials, 
boards, commissions and 
working groups -- for a
City staff advancement 
(training/promotions/succes 
sion planning) 
Identify career tracks; conduct an analysis 
of positions that have a large number of 
anticipated retirements in the coming five 
years, for opportunities to increase 
recruitment of qualified people of color. 
Develop and implement career 
pathways to ensure a diverse applicant 
pool is prepared to compete for 
vacancies; expand and sustain a high 
functioning professional development 
program 
Equitable succession plan created and 
evaluated on a quarterly basis. Sustained, 
incremental increase in qualified people of 
color employees who advance in job 
mobility and leadership within the city. 
Employee demographic data and employee 
engagement surveys 
HIGHER-LEVEL 
STATEMENT OR 
PURPOSE FOR 
THE ACTIVITY/ 
OUTCOMES 
OUTPUT DATA 
LONG-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2030) 
MID-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2025) 
SHORT-TERM 
OUTCOMES (2022) 
ACTIVITIES 


--- Page 30 ---
30 
Using shared definitions of key terms in the city’s racial equity work provides clarity 
and consistency across the organization, which leads to better analysis of how insti-
tutional racism functions and is maintained. We can then be more effective in decon-
structing these mechanisms that support institutional racism and begin constructing 
ones that produce equitable outcomes. 
— Adverse Impacts: refers to practices or policies that appear neutral but have a discriminatory 
effect on a protected group. Source: Office of Equity and Human Rights (OEHR) 
— Communities of Color: is a term used primarily in the United States to describe communi-
ties of people who are not identified as white, emphasizing common experiences of racism. 
Source: OEHR 
— Community outcomes: The specific result you are seeking to achieve within the communi-
ty that advances racial equity. Source: Seattle RSJI 
— Discrimination: refers to practices or policies that may be considered discriminatory and ille-
gal if they have a disproportionate “adverse impact” on persons in a protected class. Source: 
OEHR 
— Disparate Impacts: refers to practices or policies that may be considered discriminatory 
and illegal if they have a disproportionate “adverse impact” on persons in a protected class. 
Source: OEHR 
— Diversity: includes all the ways in which people differ, and it encompasses all the different 
characteristics that make one individual or group different from one another. Source: UC 
Berkeley CEID 
— Environmental Justice: According to the US Environmental Protection Agency, environmen-
tal justice is the right to a clean, safe and healthy quality of life for people of all races, in-
comes and cultures. Environmental justice emphasizes accountability, democratic practices, 
remedying the historical impact of environmental racism, just and equitable treatment, and 
self-determination. 
— Ethnicity: a category of people who identify with each other based on common language, 
ancestral, social, cultural, or national experiences. Source: Oxford English Dictionary 
— Equity: when one’s identity cannot predict the outcome. Source: OEHR 
— Equity Focus: is a critical thinking approach to undoing institutional and structural racism, 
which evaluates burdens, benefits, and outcomes to underserved communities. Source: 
OEHR 
— Inclusive Engagement: Processes inclusive of people of diverse races, ethnicities, cultures, 
gender identities, sexual orientations and socio-economic status. Access to information, 
resources and civic processes so community members can effectively engage in the design 
and delivery of public services. Source: Seattle RSJI 
— Institutional Racism: occurs within institutions and systems of power. It is the unfair policies 
and discriminatory practices of particular institutions (schools, workplaces, etc.) Source: 
Race Forward, Moving the Race Conversation Forward 
Resources 
Definitions 


--- Page 31 ---
31 
— Latino/Latina: a person of Latin American origin or descent, using traditional gendered lan-
guage. 
— Latinx: a person of Latin American origin or descent sometimes used as a gender-neutral or 
nonbinary alternative to Latino or Latina. 
— Marginalized populations: groups and communities that experience discrimination and ex-
clusion (social, political and economic) because of unequal power relationships across eco-
nomic, political, social and cultural dimensions. Source: National Centre for Determinants of 
Health 
— Performance Metrics: measures an organization’s behavior, activities, and performance. It as-
sesses how well workers are doing their respective tasks and how companies are accomplish-
ing their objectives. It provides hard data and gives off outcomes that appraise clearly defined 
quantities within a range that facilitates improvement and upgrading. Source: Wikipedia 
— Privilege: refers to the unearned set of advantages, entitlements, and benefits bestowed by 
the formal and informal institutions of society to ALL members of a dominant group (e.g. White 
privilege, male privilege, economic privilege, etc.). Privilege is usually invisible to those who 
have it. Source: OEHR 
— Race: A non-scientific, social construct that divides people into distinct groups based on 
characteristics such as physical appearance, ancestral heritage, cultural affiliation, cultural his-
tory, or ethnic classification. Source: Maurianne Adams, Lee Anne Bell and Pat Griffin, editors. 
Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: A Sourcebook. New York: Routledge. 
— Racial Equity: when race does not determine or predict the distribution of resources, econom-
ic/political/social opportunities, and burdens for group members in society. Source: OEHR and 
Seattle RSJI 
— Racial Equity Framework: An understanding of the root causes of racial disparities, an analysis 
of the structures that perpetuate these disparities, and the ability to deploy critical strategies 
to undoing those structures (e.g., community self-determination, shifting power) in order to 
replace them with structures that produce equitable outcomes. 
— Racial Equity Tools: A set of strategies, procedures, and resources designed to integrate 
explicit consideration of racial equity and that can be implemented and applied throughout 
organizational policy, procedures, and operations to ensure/drive equitable process, impacts, 
and outcomes. Source: OEHR 
— Stakeholders: Those impacted by proposed policy, program or budget issue who have poten-
tial concerns or issue expertise. Source: Seattle RSJI 
— Structural Racism: is racial bias among institutions and across society. Source: Race Forward, 
Moving the Race Conversation Forward 
— Underserved: refers to people and places that historically and currently have not had equita-
ble resources or access to infrastructure, healthy environments, housing choice, etc. Dispari-
ties may be recognized in both services and in outcomes. Source: OEHR 


--- Page 32 ---
42 
SCORECARD RANK 
40% 
RANK
RACIAL DISPARITY 
60% 
OUTCOME RANK
7 
14 
32 
Prosperity Now Scorecard 
Although Boulder County ranked markedly better than the state as a whole on many measures of prosperity, 
that wealth was not always equally distributed. For example, Boulder was measured as having half the average 
Colorado poverty rate at just 5.8 percent, it had higher income inequality and higher costs of homeownership. 
Fewer people in Boulder were without health insurance than the statewide or nationwide average; however, 
proportionally more of the uninsured in this county were people of color. 
The organization Prosperity Now published its annual scorecards to determine where Americans are most 
— and least — able to build wealth, avoid poverty and create a more prosperous future for themselves. In the 
report, all 50 states and Washington, D.C. receive a rank in three categories: outcome rank, racial disparity rank 
and scorecard rank. Outcome rank shows how a state is doing for its residents overall, without accounting for 
racial disparities. Racial disparity rank looks at just that — gaps across 26 outcome measures between white 
residents and residents of color. 
Here’s how Colorado ranked: 
— Scorecard rank: 14 (out of 50 states) 
— Outcome rank: 7 
— Racial disparity rank: 42 
The rankings were based on an analysis 
of 78 measures spanning five categories: financial assets and income; businesses and jobs; homeownership 
and housing; health care; and education. It also assessed each state for 28 policies that promote financial 
security. 
Colorado ranks 14th on the prosperity of its residents compared to the 50 states and the District of Columbia. 
This rank is based on states’ performance on economic measures for all residents but also accounts for racial 
disparities in outcomes. Relative to other states, Colorado’s performance ranks in the top 10 states for resi-
dents overall. However, the extreme gap between White residents and residents of color drops the state’s rank 
and has negative implications for the prosperity of Colorado. For example, the homeownership rate of White 
households is 70% compared to 50% for Latino households and 40% for Black households. 
The Scorecard ranks states and DC from best to worst: #1 is the most desirable, #51 is the least desirable. 
The Scorecard rank is a factor of two underlying ranks: an Outcome rank for all residents and a Racial Disparity 
rank on the gap in outcomes between White residents and residents of color. The Outcome rank accounts for 
60% of the Scorecard rank and the Racial Disparity rank for 40%. This average is then re-ranked to obtain the 
final Scorecard rank, making it possible for states to have lower Outcome and Racial Disparity ranks than their 
final Scorecard rank. 
The Outcome Rank is calculated by averaging the individual ranks on 52 outcome measures for all residents 
compared to residents of other states and DC. The Racial Disparity rank is calculated by averaging the gaps in 
outcomes for White residents and residents of color on 26 measures. A Racial Disparity Rank of 51 means that 
the disparity is the largest compared to all states and DC, and a lower rank indicates that the disparity is nar-
rower than in other parts of the country. 
Racial Inequity Data 


--- Page 33 ---
Race and Hispanic Origin 
○White alone, percent
! 87.4%
○Black or African American alone, percent (a) 
! 1.2% 
○American Indian and Alaska Native alone, percent (a) 
! 0.2% 
○Asian alone, percent (a) 
! 5.8% 
○Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, percent (a) 
! 0.1% 
○Two or More Races, percent 
! 3.8% 
○Hispanic or Latino, percent (b) 
! 9.7% 
○White alone, not Hispanic or Latino, percent 
! 79.6%
City of Boulder Population and Demographics 
The following population data provides a snapshot of our City of Boulder demographics. 
This data set is portrayed in several different formats for a more complete illustration of our community’s 
populaltion. Please note that much of this information relies on data from the decennial Census and the most 
recent data available is from 2010. This section will be updated in future editions of the city’s Racial Equity Plan, 
once data from the 2020 Census is publicly available from the Census Bureau.  
*estimated population as of July 1, 2019, per U.S. Census Bureau 
This image represents a Racial Dot Map, 
created by the University of Virginia’s 
Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service 
and utilizing Census data from 2010. Each 
dot represents one person living in a 
given census tract, not a specific address. 
Individual dots are randomly located and 
align with the aggregate population within 
a given census tract. 
While concerns exist about the 
researchers lumping together “Other 
Races / Native American / Multi-racial” 
categories into one dot color, the Racial 
Dot Map may still provide a helpful 
big-picture perspective of our city’s 
demographics. 


--- Page 34 ---
The following eight maps showing census tract data from the American Community Survey 5-year 
Estimates (2012-2017). The data are broken out into percentages of different racial groups. There are still 
questions to answer about the best way to use this, but the hope is that in combination with other data, 
they can help us determine where public services are needed to create a more equitable city. 
Observations about the maps: 
— Pay attention to percentages because colors of maps can be deceiving 
— Confirms a predominantly white population 
— Classification method is quantiles (equal number of observations in each class), but maybe another 
method is more valuable 
Data source: Living Atlas provided by ESRI, sourcing the 2012-2017 ACS 5-Year Census Tract Data 


--- Page 35 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 36 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 37 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 38 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 39 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 40 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 41 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (0 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]

--- Page 42 ---
42 
— Hickcox, Abby (2007) “Green Belt, White City: Race and the Natural Landscape in Boulder, Colorado,” 
Discourse: Journal for Theoretical Studies in Media and Culture: Vol. 29 : Iss. 2 , Article 3. Available at: 
https://digitalcommons.wayne.edu/discourse/vol29/iss2/3  
— Summary: hidden behind the guise of open space preservation and conservation lurks a philos-
ophy of ensuring the “right people” enjoy Boulder’s landscape in perpetuity.  
— Southern Arapahoe Chief Niwot, History and Background 
— Toward Right Relationship with Native Peoples, Toolkit  
— Conflict, Race, Violence Video (Boulder County Latino History) 
— Latinos of Boulder County, Colorado; 1900-1980; Volume I: History and Contributions; Chapter: Con-
flict, Racism, and Violence, 1910-1940 
— Ellen Tate Interview (2001) from the Carnegie Library, Boulder, CO 
— ABSTRACT: Ellen Tate describes growing up in Philadelphia, moving frequently with her hus-
band, Penfield Tate II, while he was in the military; and moving to Boulder in 1967. She speaks 
about experiences as an African American, experiencing racism while traveling in the 1960s, 
creating a sense of black community in Boulder, and race relations in general in Boulder. 
— De Laris Carpenter Interview (2001) from the Carnegie Library, Boulder, CO 
— ABSTRACT: De Laris Carpenter talks about her upbringing in Mississippi; her life in Boulder; her 
career as a teacher, counselor, and administrator; and the role of family in her life, addressing 
both her own childhood and her role as a parent. Throughout the interview, she discusses the 
African American community and interactions of the white and African American communi-
ties, including discussion of racism in Boulder, at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and in the 
Boulder Valley Schools. 
— “Boulder Releases Data on Law Enforcement Discrimination”, KUNC Report, May 1, 2019 
— “Boulder prides itself on being welcoming to all. But its citizens of color tell a different story”, Daily 
Camera Article, July 28, 2018 
Additional Resources: Racial History of The City of Boulder 


--- Page 43 ---
[This page has very little extractable text (8 words) — may be primarily an image, map, or graphic. If this section matters, check the source PDF directly for this page's visual content.]
